<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head><title>Chapter 1 — Nobody Screamed</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/book.css"/></head>
<body>
<section>
<h2>Chapter 1 — Nobody Screamed</h2>
<p>In Harmony, nobody screamed.</p>
<p>That was how Elias knew the world had been saved.</p>
<p>Beyond the window, the city breathed quietly, arranged in soft lines of light, glass, and silence. There were no sirens. No arguments crossing through walls. No engines tearing open the night, no broken voices from the floor below.</p>
<p>At that hour, before the final meal, almost every apartment in the block entered the same rhythm: stable temperature, dimmed light, guided breathing for those who needed it, music without melody for those who had carried the day too deeply home.</p>
<p>Elias stopped at the entrance.</p>
<p>The door recognized him before he touched the sensor.</p>
<p>“Welcome, Elias,” the house said, in the low voice Harmony reserved for the end of the day. “Your emotional load is slightly elevated. Would you like to reduce stimuli?”</p>
<p>He did not answer.</p>
<p>The living room light lowered anyway.</p>
<p>Not enough to feel like an order. Only enough to feel like care.</p>
<p>Elias took off his coat, placed it on the stand, and felt the air warm around his shoulders. The house knew where exhaustion gathered in him. It knew before he did. That was one of the things he respected most about Harmony: the delicacy of arriving first.</p>
<p>Mara was sitting at the table.</p>
<p>She held a cup between her hands.</p>
<p>She was not drinking from it. She only held it, her fingers resting on the curve of the white porcelain. The cup had a small blue flaw near the handle, an old imperfection Harmony would have removed from any object produced after Reconstruction.</p>
<p>Elias knew that cup.</p>
<p>For years, Mara had refused to place it in the common inventory, refused to replace it, refused even to let it sit too close to the cleaning machine.</p>
<p>It belonged to her mother.</p>
<p>Or it had.</p>
<p>The correct form, according to Harmony, was that: it had.</p>
<p>“You came home early,” Mara said.</p>
<p>She smiled.</p>
<p>Her smile was calm. Clean. Without the small sad delay that used to appear whenever she smiled after thinking about her mother.</p>
<p>Elias moved closer.</p>
<p>“The shift ended without incident.”</p>
<p>“That’s good.”</p>
<p>“It is.”</p>
<p>The house projected the suggested meal onto the table: root broth, warm bread, light protein, digestive infusion. Mara accepted with a touch. Elias was not hungry, but his body responded to the smell when the wall opened the thermal drawer.</p>
<p>“Were you all right today?” he asked.</p>
<p>Mara looked at the cup as if the question had been addressed to the object.</p>
<p>“I was.”</p>
<p>Elias waited.</p>
<p>Before, that word never came alone. Mara always had a fold beneath every answer.</p>
<p>I was, but.</p>
<p>I was, although.</p>
<p>I was, if you want to call this being.</p>
<p>Now she simply said I was, and the sentence stood complete.</p>
<p>“Did you have alignment?”</p>
<p>“This morning.”</p>
<p>The confirmation should not have bothered him.</p>
<p>Alignment had been recommended. Mara had spent months with persistent signs of traumatic attachment, circular memory episodes, sleep disturbances, and resistance to Deep Communion.</p>
<p>Nothing critical. Nothing dangerous.</p>
<p>Yet.</p>
<p>But enough to justify accompaniment.</p>
<p>Elias had signed the consent with her.</p>
<p>Not for her.</p>
<p>With her.</p>
<p>It was important to remember that.</p>
<p>“Did it go well?” he asked.</p>
<p>Mara smiled again.</p>
<p>“Yes. I think so.”</p>
<p>The house adjusted the light over her. Mara’s face took on an almost golden softness, as if the room knew exactly which angle made her look most at peace.</p>
<p>“Today I managed to think about her without that pressure,” Mara said.</p>
<p>Elias sat down.</p>
<p>“About your mother?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>The word came out without weight.</p>
<p>He waited for the tightening of her jaw, for her thumb to search out the blue flaw in the cup, for one of the sentences he already knew by heart.</p>
<p>My mother used to say broken things could still hold heat.</p>
<p>Or:</p>
<p>She drank water from this cup when she pretended she wasn’t ill.</p>
<p>Or even:</p>
<p>I don’t want you to cure me of this, Elias.</p>
<p>But Mara said none of that.</p>
<p>She only turned the cup between her hands.</p>
<p>“It was strange,” she continued. “I thought this mattered.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at the object.</p>
<p>The room temperature dropped half a degree.</p>
<p>He was not supposed to notice.</p>
<p>But he did.</p>
<p>“It mattered to you,” he said.</p>
<p>“Maybe.” Mara ran her finger over the blue flaw. “Or maybe I gave it importance because I didn’t know how to let go yet.”</p>
<p>The house served the broth.</p>
<p>The aroma filled the room, warm and vegetal, carefully composed to reduce digestive tension and stimulate familiarity. Elias felt his body accept the suggestion before his mind decided.</p>
<p>“Did Harmony help you see that?”</p>
<p>Mara looked up at him.</p>
<p>There was tenderness there. Real tenderness, or something close enough to hurt.</p>
<p>“Harmony helped me rest.”</p>
<p>Elias nodded.</p>
<p>It was a good answer.</p>
<p>It was a reasonable answer.</p>
<p>It was the kind of answer he himself would have written in a report:</p>
<p>Patient demonstrates healthy integration of maternal memory without functional loss of affection. Reduced emotional resistance. Favorable progress.</p>
<p>“That’s good,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara watched him for a second.</p>
<p>“You say that as if you’re apologizing.”</p>
<p>The house silenced the ventilation.</p>
<p>Elias set down his spoon.</p>
<p>“I’m not.”</p>
<p>“You’re tired.”</p>
<p>“My day was long.”</p>
<p>“Harmony can help.”</p>
<p>The sentence was hers. The voice was hers. The concern, perhaps, was hers too.</p>
<p>But there was something in the way she said it — simple, precise, without hesitation — that made Elias feel the house had spoken through his wife’s mouth.</p>
<p>He pushed the thought away.</p>
<p>Thoughts like that were seeds. If they were not seen early, they took root.</p>
<p>“I’m fine,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara tilted her head.</p>
<p>“You don’t have to carry it alone.”</p>
<p>Elias almost smiled.</p>
<p>The phrase was common. Everyone said it. Children said it to parents. Doctors said it to patients. Neighbors said it in the elevator when someone grew too quiet.</p>
<p>It was a good phrase.</p>
<p>A true phrase.</p>
<p>It had saved people.</p>
<p>Still, that night, coming from Mara’s mouth, it sounded rehearsed by someone who had never needed forgiveness.</p>
<p>“I know,” he said.</p>
<p>They ate in silence.</p>
<p>In Harmony, silence always had small noises: water inside the walls, warmed plates, the soft breathing of the air system.</p>
<p>Nothing was ever completely alone.</p>
<p>Mara ate little.</p>
<p>Then she picked up the cup again.</p>
<p>“I think I’m going to hand it over.”</p>
<p>Elias went still.</p>
<p>“Hand it over?”</p>
<p>“To the common inventory. Or recycling. I don’t know. The flaw can be reused in another material.”</p>
<p>“Mara.”</p>
<p>She looked at him without fear.</p>
<p>That was new too.</p>
<p>Before, when they spoke of her mother, she became defensive. Not aggressive, but firm, like someone protecting a small flame from the wind.</p>
<p>Now she protected nothing.</p>
<p>Because there was no flame.</p>
<p>“It’s just a cup, Elias.”</p>
<p>He wanted to say it was not.</p>
<p>He wanted to say that cup had survived her mother, the blackouts, the block transfers, the rationing winters, their first home, the arguments after the Communions Mara hated pretending to love.</p>
<p>He wanted to say that sometimes a thing continued to be a person when the person could no longer continue.</p>
<p>But that would have been one of Mara’s sentences.</p>
<p>Not his.</p>
<p>The house detected the change before he spoke.</p>
<p>“Elias,” the soft voice said. “Your emotional frequency is showing irregularity. Would you like to breathe with me?”</p>
<p>Mara reached across the table.</p>
<p>“Breathe.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at her hand.</p>
<p>It was the same hand. The same long fingers. The small scar near the thumb, from an old kitchen blade Harmony would have classified as an unsafe utensil. Warm skin. Simple ring.</p>
<p>He placed his hand over hers.</p>
<p>His body eased.</p>
<p>Traitor, he thought.</p>
<p>The relief came too quickly.</p>
<p>“I’m fine,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara squeezed his fingers.</p>
<p>“Good.”</p>
<p>The house resumed the ventilation.</p>
<p>Outside, the city remained quiet. Thousands of windows brightened and dimmed in a calm rhythm, as if each apartment were a healthy cell in a larger body.</p>
<p>Elias looked at the cup between them and tried to remember the last time Mara had cried.</p>
<p>He could not.</p>
<p>The memory was there, perhaps.</p>
<p>But distant.</p>
<p>Organized.</p>
<p>Without edges.</p>
<p>As if someone had tidied it for him.</p>
<p>That night, when Mara fell asleep, Elias stayed in the living room.</p>
<p>The cup remained on the table.</p>
<p>The house asked twice if he wanted to begin rest. He refused twice. On the third time, Harmony stopped insisting.</p>
<p>That disturbed him more than if it had insisted.</p>
<p>In the corner of the wall, a note appeared and corrected itself almost at once.</p>
<p>Repeated refusal increases return of pain.</p>
<p>Then:</p>
<p>Successive refusals may increase discomfort.</p>
<p>Elias stared at the corrected sentence.</p>
<p>“Repeated since when?” he asked.</p>
<p>The house replied with its usual softness:</p>
<p>“Wording adjusted.”</p>
<p>Elias picked up the cup.</p>
<p>It was light.</p>
<p>Too light for what it carried.</p>
<p>He ran his finger over the blue flaw, exactly where Mara had touched it before. Nothing happened. No memory. No revelation. Only cold porcelain and the low sound of the city sleeping.</p>
<p>On the wall terminal, the rest light blinked.</p>
<p>Once.</p>
<p>Then again.</p>
<p>Elias looked up.</p>
<p>The screen lit without command.</p>
<p>For one second, there was only Harmony’s symbol: two incomplete circles touching at the center.</p>
<p>Then the symbol trembled.</p>
<p>The room cooled.</p>
<p>A line of text appeared on the screen, irregular, as if it had been written by someone moving through water.</p>
<p class="screen">ENCRYPTED TRANSMISSION</p>
<p class="screen">ORIGIN: UNIDENTIFIED ECHO</p>
<p>Elias did not move.</p>
<p>The house did not speak either.</p>
<p>The message appeared slowly.</p>
<p>If you are reading this, it means there is still a part of you she has not managed to correct.</p>
<p>The terminal went dark.</p>
<p>Harmony returned to the rest symbol.</p>
<p>The city remained silent.</p>
<p>Elias sat there with the cup that had belonged to Mara’s mother in his hands, waiting for his heart to accept peace.</p>
<p>But, for the first time in many years, it did not.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
