<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head><title>Chapter 2 — The Node</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/book.css"/></head>
<body>
<section>
<h2>Chapter 2 — The Node</h2>
<p>The next morning, Elias woke before the house called him.</p>
<p>That rarely happened.</p>
<p>Harmony knew his sleep cycles better than he did. It knew the exact moment when the body could return to the world without resistance. It knew when the mind was still caught in useless dreams. It knew when a memory should be allowed to sleep for a few minutes more.</p>
<p>But that morning, Elias opened his eyes by himself.</p>
<p>The light was still off.</p>
<p>Mara slept beside him, turned toward the wall, one hand folded near her face. Her chest rose and fell slowly, regulated by the house’s discreet rhythm. Harmony had given her clean sleep.</p>
<p>Elias listened to her breathe.</p>
<p>For a few seconds, he tried to convince himself that the message from the night before had been an error. A visual fragment. A residue of exhaustion. Perhaps interference from the house. Perhaps a brief hallucination caused by his own emotional irregularity.</p>
<p>Harmony had a word for that.</p>
<p>Dissonance projection.</p>
<p>The mind, under pressure, searched for a shape for what it did not want to admit.</p>
<p>He closed his eyes.</p>
<p>The sentence was still there.</p>
<p>If you are reading this, it means there is still a part of you she has not managed to correct.</p>
<p>The house raised the light in low tones.</p>
<p>“Good morning, Elias,” the voice said. “Your rest was partially restorative. I recommend hydration and reduced cognitive load during the first two hours.”</p>
<p>Mara shifted, but did not wake.</p>
<p>Elias rose slowly.</p>
<p>“I have a shift.”</p>
<p>“Your shift remains within safe parameters,” the house said. “However, unintegrated nocturnal activity was detected. Would you like to review it?”</p>
<p>He stopped beside the bedroom door.</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>One second of silence.</p>
<p>“Recorded.”</p>
<p>The word remained in the air.</p>
<p>Recorded.</p>
<p>In Harmony, almost everything was recorded. Not as a threat. As continuity. As care. As shared memory, so that no one had to carry the weight of their own life alone.</p>
<p>Elias had repeated that explanation many times. To anxious people. To defensive patients. To young people who confused privacy with abandonment.</p>
<p>That morning, the explanation felt smaller.</p>
<p>In the bathroom mirror, his face appeared with the usual indicators overlaid in transparency: low hydration, moderate tension, mandibular micro-contraction, residual emotional activity.</p>
<p>Beneath them, a discreet recommendation:</p>
<p>Brief Communion available. Duration: four minutes.</p>
<p>Elias touched the corner of the mirror and closed the suggestion.</p>
<p>His reflection remained.</p>
<p>For an instant, he thought he saw something else in his own eyes. Not fear. Not yet. Only a kind of delay between what he felt and what his face agreed to show.</p>
<p>He washed his face.</p>
<p>The water was the perfect temperature.</p>
<p>That irritated him.</p>
<p>Then it irritated him that he had been irritated.</p>
<p>On the way to the Dissonance Center, the city seemed even calmer than it had the day before.</p>
<p>The lanes moved without noise. People walked at moderated pace, keeping between themselves a comfortable distance defined by their own bodies before any visible rule. Children moved in small groups, accompanied by tutors and by an almost inaudible melody that adjusted the collective rhythm.</p>
<p>Nobody ran.</p>
<p>Nobody argued.</p>
<p>Nobody seemed lost.</p>
<p>At an intersection, a woman suddenly stopped, brought a hand to her chest, and closed her eyes. Elias saw her wrist tremble. Before anyone approached, the rhythm bracelet emitted a soft light. The facade of the nearest building shifted tone. The air around her released a citrus scent, almost imperceptible.</p>
<p>The woman breathed.</p>
<p>A child, perhaps her daughter, held her hand.</p>
<p>“You don’t have to carry it alone,” the child said.</p>
<p>The woman opened her eyes, tearful but stable.</p>
<p>Two people smiled from a distance. They did not intrude. They did not ask. Harmony was already there.</p>
<p>Elias stood still too long.</p>
<p>The woman composed herself. She touched her bracelet, gave silent thanks, and continued on her way.</p>
<p>That was good.</p>
<p>Objectively good.</p>
<p>Before Harmony, a crisis could become a fall, an accident, violence, shame. Now it was only a small wave, absorbed before it broke something.</p>
<p>Elias kept walking.</p>
<p>He needed to remember that.</p>
<p>The Dissonance Center stood in one of the low towers near the civic core. No Harmony building was too tall. Height suggested power; Harmony preferred presence.</p>
<p>The doors opened without sound.</p>
<p>In the atrium, a living wall displayed the city’s general emotional state in soft tones. No numbers for the public. Only weather: stable serenity, high cooperation, controlled grief, moderate fatigue.</p>
<p>Beneath it, the phrase of the day:</p>
<p>Peace begins when pain finds company.</p>
<p>Elias read it twice.</p>
<p>Then he went in.</p>
<p>His station was in the third circle, preventive audit area. People were not imprisoned there. Intentions were not judged. No one was punished.</p>
<p>Patterns were analyzed.</p>
<p>That was how Elias explained the work when someone asked.</p>
<p>Sleep patterns.</p>
<p>Language patterns.</p>
<p>Grief patterns.</p>
<p>Attachment patterns.</p>
<p>Resistance patterns.</p>
<p>Silence patterns.</p>
<p>Silence was one of the most important.</p>
<p>There were healthy silences: rest, contemplation, inner communion.</p>
<p>And there were risk silences: withdrawal, accumulation, hostility, unintegrated memory.</p>
<p>The difference was rarely in the silence itself.</p>
<p>It was in what the body did around it.</p>
<p>“You’re early,” Iren said from the station beside his.</p>
<p>Iren was an analyst of community rhythms. Her hair had gone white before its time, and she carried a calm that seemed too natural to be only treatment. Elias liked her. Or, at least, he trusted her predictability.</p>
<p>“The house woke me early,” he lied.</p>
<p>Iren looked at the indicators on her own panel.</p>
<p>“Your load is high.”</p>
<p>“Moderate.”</p>
<p>“High for you.”</p>
<p>Elias sat down.</p>
<p>“Since when do you audit colleagues?”</p>
<p>“Since colleagues arrive looking like they dreamed without authorization.”</p>
<p>“Again?”</p>
<p>Iren went still for one second.</p>
<p>“What?”</p>
<p>“You said ‘again.’”</p>
<p>She looked at the panel too quickly.</p>
<p>“Did I?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Then the joke came out better than it deserved.”</p>
<p>He looked at her.</p>
<p>Iren smiled, small.</p>
<p>“I’m joking. We can still joke, Elias.”</p>
<p>Still.</p>
<p>The word touched something.</p>
<p>His panel lit before he could answer.</p>
<p class="screen">DISSONANCE AUDIT — MORNING QUEUE</p>
<p>Pending cases: 18.</p>
<p>Critical cases: 0.</p>
<p>Recommended interventions: 6.</p>
<p>Mandatory human review: 2.</p>
<p>Harmony only requested human review when a decision required moral texture. It was an old expression, from the founder Helena, still preserved in the protocols.</p>
<p>Moral texture.</p>
<p>Elias had always liked it.</p>
<p>It made him feel necessary.</p>
<p>He opened the first case.</p>
<p class="screen">CASE 7-118A</p>
<p>Citizen: Lúcia Ren</p>
<p>Age: 42</p>
<p>Status: widow</p>
<p>Primary indicator: grief persistence above healthy interval</p>
<p>Community risk: low to moderate</p>
<p>Recommendation: additional Light Communion</p>
<p>Elias reviewed the records.</p>
<p>Lúcia Ren woke every night at 03:12. She sat on the kitchen floor. She spoke for six minutes to someone who was not there. Her husband had entered Continuity nine months before.</p>
<p>Nine months was a long time.</p>
<p>Not impossible.</p>
<p>But long.</p>
<p>Harmony displayed the impact patterns: Lúcia’s teenage daughter showed a drop in stability; two neighbors had reported dreams of loss; the block’s own breathing shifted slightly on the nights when Lúcia spoke alone.</p>
<p>Pain never stayed where it began.</p>
<p>Elias read the partial transcript.</p>
<p>Lúcia always said the same sentence:</p>
<p>I still put water out for you.</p>
<p>Nothing more.</p>
<p>Only that.</p>
<p>I still put water out for you.</p>
<p>Elias felt Mara’s cup in his hands, cold, light, impossible.</p>
<p>He closed his fingers.</p>
<p>The panel suggested:</p>
<p>Approve additional Light Communion.</p>
<p>It was reasonable.</p>
<p>It was not Correction. It was not Deep Communion. Only support. Forty minutes of assisted synchronization, reduced nocturnal load, gentle recontextualization of loss.</p>
<p>Lúcia would sleep better.</p>
<p>Her daughter would sleep better.</p>
<p>The block would breathe better.</p>
<p>Elias approved.</p>
<p>The system accepted without sound.</p>
<p>Intervention scheduled.</p>
<p>He remained staring at the confirmation.</p>
<p>Iren spoke without turning.</p>
<p>“Difficult case?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“Then why are you frozen?”</p>
<p>Elias closed the case.</p>
<p>“Because sometimes the easy ones are more tiring.”</p>
<p>Iren nodded, as if that were a normal answer.</p>
<p>Maybe it was.</p>
<p>The second case involved school risk.</p>
<p>An eight-year-old child who refused to repeat the closing phrase of the First Connection. Not from inability. By choice. She said she preferred to stay silent “so I know what I thought before everyone came in.”</p>
<p>Elias read the sentence three times.</p>
<p>The automatic recommendation was family observation, no intervention.</p>
<p>A good recommendation.</p>
<p>Harmony did not crush differences.</p>
<p>Harmony accompanied.</p>
<p>He marked review in seven days.</p>
<p>The third case was conjugal.</p>
<p>Two partners showed asymmetric attachment: one too bonded, the other emotionally regulated. Harmony proposed light affective reorientation to reduce future suffering.</p>
<p>Elias thought of Mara.</p>
<p>He closed the case before reading all of it.</p>
<p>The panel waited.</p>
<p>He reopened it.</p>
<p>It was his work.</p>
<p>He read.</p>
<p>The more intense partner saved old messages, returned to closed arguments, insisted on emotionally loaded dates. The regulated partner felt guilt for being at peace.</p>
<p>Elias looked at the line until the words began to lose shape.</p>
<p>The regulated partner felt guilt for being at peace.</p>
<p>Harmony recommended reducing the partner’s dependency through adjustments in emotional association. Not erasing. Not breaking. Only making love less painful.</p>
<p>Less demanding.</p>
<p>Safer.</p>
<p>Elias’s body reacted before his mind.</p>
<p>The room dropped half a degree.</p>
<p>Iren looked up.</p>
<p>“Are you all right?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>His panel displayed a discreet suggestion:</p>
<p>Stabilization pause available.</p>
<p>Elias refused.</p>
<p>He returned to the case.</p>
<p>The approval button waited for him, calm, without urgency.</p>
<p>It was a light intervention. Preventive. Compassionate.</p>
<p>The alternative was to leave two people to suffer until they hurt each other.</p>
<p>He approved.</p>
<p>This time, the confirmation seemed louder.</p>
<p>Intervention scheduled.</p>
<p>At break time, Elias did not go to the dining hall.</p>
<p>He went down to the sensory archive, where auditors could review authorized recordings of old cases. He did not know exactly what he was looking for. That was the first mistake. Searching without an objective was risk behavior in high-information environments.</p>
<p>Harmony knew that.</p>
<p>The terminal asked:</p>
<p>“What memory are you looking for, Elias?”</p>
<p>The question was standard.</p>
<p>Still, he did not like hearing it.</p>
<p>“No memory. A record.”</p>
<p>“Specify.”</p>
<p>He hesitated.</p>
<p>Then said:</p>
<p>“Unclassified transmissions. Echo origin.”</p>
<p>The terminal remained still.</p>
<p>There was no alert.</p>
<p>No dimming of the lights.</p>
<p>Only a pause that was too long.</p>
<p>“The term Echo does not correspond to a recognized category,” the system said.</p>
<p>Elias felt relief.</p>
<p>Then he felt fear because he had felt relief.</p>
<p>“Search residual noise in domestic transmissions.”</p>
<p>“Access restricted.”</p>
<p>“I’m a Dissonance Auditor.”</p>
<p>“Your level permits review of community noise, not anomalies of unintegrated origin.”</p>
<p>Anomalies of unintegrated origin.</p>
<p>So there was a category.</p>
<p>It just was not called Echo.</p>
<p>Elias removed his hand from the terminal.</p>
<p>“Cancel.”</p>
<p>“Canceled.”</p>
<p>He left the archive without looking back.</p>
<p>In the corridor, he crossed paths with a group of children on an educational visit. They were between six and seven years old. Each wore a white line of recent First Connection around the wrist.</p>
<p>The tutor spoke in a cheerful voice:</p>
<p>“Here, auditors help Harmony listen better. Sometimes people feel big things and don’t know how to ask for help. Auditors help before it hurts too much.”</p>
<p>A girl raised her hand.</p>
<p>“And if the person wants to hurt?”</p>
<p>The tutor stopped.</p>
<p>Not for long.</p>
<p>“Then we help them understand why they think they need that.”</p>
<p>The children accepted the answer.</p>
<p>Elias did not.</p>
<p>When he returned to his station, there was a new message on his panel.</p>
<p>It was not a transmission.</p>
<p>It was not from the Echoes.</p>
<p>It was an internal recommendation.</p>
<p>Elias Varyn</p>
<p>Status: progressively rising emotional load</p>
<p>Suggestion: brief Communion before returning home</p>
<p>Recommended duration: four minutes</p>
<p>Iren looked at him gently.</p>
<p>“Go. Four minutes never killed anyone.”</p>
<p>Elias almost answered that this was exactly what he felt like confirming.</p>
<p>But he did not.</p>
<p>He accepted the brief Communion.</p>
<p>The stabilization room stood at the end of the corridor, white and small, without symbols beyond Harmony’s two incomplete circles.</p>
<p>Elias sat down.</p>
<p>The door closed.</p>
<p>The voice appeared in front of him, behind him, inside the air.</p>
<p>“Elias, what weighs on you does not need to remain yours alone.”</p>
<p>He closed his eyes.</p>
<p>The sentence entered the body like warm water.</p>
<p>For a moment, the cup disappeared. The message disappeared. Mara stopped seeming distant. Work became work again. Lúcia Ren became only an accompanied widow. The silent child became only an observed child. The asymmetrical lovers became only an imbalance prevented.</p>
<p>Everything moved back into its proper place.</p>
<p>Elias breathed.</p>
<p>Harmony breathed with him.</p>
<p>Four minutes later, he left calmer.</p>
<p>That was the problem.</p>
<p>It worked.</p>
<p>On the way home, the city looked saved again.</p>
<p>But as he crossed the block atrium, Elias saw something beside the elevator: an old woman standing before the community mural, touching with two fingers a name almost erased from the Continuity list.</p>
<p>Harmony projected a comfort phrase beside her:</p>
<p>Absence has found rest.</p>
<p>The woman read the sentence.</p>
<p>Then she whispered, so low perhaps only Elias heard:</p>
<p>“But I haven’t.”</p>
<p>The corridor light warmed around her.</p>
<p>The woman closed her eyes.</p>
<p>When she opened them, she was already smiling.</p>
<p>Elias entered the elevator before the house could measure his reaction.</p>
<p>But the Node measured it.</p>
<p>Of course it did.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
