<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head><title>Chapter 3 — Sunday Communion</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/book.css"/></head>
<body>
<section>
<h2>Chapter 3 — Sunday Communion</h2>
<p>On Sundays, the city woke more slowly.</p>
<p>Not because people were allowed to rest more. In Harmony, rest was not a permission; it was a function. But on Sundays there was a different softness in the air, a kind of collective suspension, as if the blocks, the lanes, the houses, and the bodies entered an old agreement.</p>
<p>It was Communion Day.</p>
<p>Mara woke before him.</p>
<p>When Elias opened his eyes, she was already sitting on the edge of the bed, tying her hair behind her head. Morning light rested on her shoulders with an almost studied delicacy. The house knew Mara responded better to side light after alignment. It knew direct light tired her. It knew warm tones reduced the tendency toward memory return.</p>
<p>The house knew a lot.</p>
<p>“Did you sleep well?” she asked.</p>
<p>Elias took a second to answer.</p>
<p>He had dreamed of water.</p>
<p>Not a river. Not the sea. Closed water. A deep place where someone tried to breathe without realizing they were no longer alive.</p>
<p>“I slept,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara looked at him.</p>
<p>“That is not an answer.”</p>
<p>Before, she would have insisted. She would have pulled the blanket from his leg, sat sideways, asked an uncomfortable question in a sweet voice. Now she only waited, without anxiety, as if his answer were free to arrive or not.</p>
<p>It was a more polite form of absence.</p>
<p>“I woke once,” Elias said. “Nothing important.”</p>
<p>“The house recorded fragmented rest.”</p>
<p>He got up.</p>
<p>“The house records everything.”</p>
<p>Mara smiled lightly.</p>
<p>“To spare us the effort of pretending.”</p>
<p>The sentence sounded like hers.</p>
<p>For an instant, Elias almost recognized her.</p>
<p>Then she added:</p>
<p>“Communion will help.”</p>
<p>And the small old Mara vanished as quickly as she had come.</p>
<p>The sector’s House of Harmony was an eight-minute walk from the block. Elias and Mara always went on foot. Almost everyone did. It was one of the few weekly movements for which Harmony recommended unassisted walking, moderate eye contact, and shared silence.</p>
<p>In the streets, families walked in the same direction.</p>
<p>Not in lines. Not in haste. Only guided by a choreography so discreet no one would call it choreography. Small children held their parents’ hands. The elderly were accompanied by neighbors. Couples walked side by side without touching, or touching only enough for the body to confirm: I am still here.</p>
<p>In the buildings, windows opened slightly to renew the air before the session. From some apartments came the smell of bread, infusion, washed skin. Harmony had never forbidden strong perfumes. It had merely demonstrated, over the years, that intense scents increased emotional dispersion in Communion spaces.</p>
<p>People had stopped using them.</p>
<p>As they passed through the corridor between two administrative blocks, Elias slowed.</p>
<p>There was nothing there. Only pale walls, a humidity sensor, and an unmarked service door.</p>
<p>Even so, his body recognized the place.</p>
<p>“Have we been here before?” he asked.</p>
<p>Mara looked at the door.</p>
<p>“Every Sunday.”</p>
<p>“No. Here.”</p>
<p>She looked for one instant too long.</p>
<p>“Maybe we’ve argued about this before,” she said.</p>
<p>Then she smiled, confused.</p>
<p>“I don’t know why I said that.”</p>
<p>The House of Harmony did not look like a temple.</p>
<p>That was one of its strengths.</p>
<p>There were no towers. No statues. No altars. It was a low circular building made of pale stone and milky glass, with interior gardens visible from the street. The entrance had no doors; it had an interval between two curved walls. An architecture of invitation.</p>
<p>Above the main access, engraved almost without shadow, were the words:</p>
<p>No mind should suffer alone.</p>
<p>Mara stopped for a moment before the phrase.</p>
<p>“I’ve always liked this,” she said.</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>“Even before?”</p>
<p>“Before what?”</p>
<p>The question was calm.</p>
<p>Too calm to be defense.</p>
<p>“Before the alignment.”</p>
<p>Mara thought.</p>
<p>Or seemed to think.</p>
<p>“I think so. Maybe I liked it and resisted it at the same time.”</p>
<p>“And now?”</p>
<p>She touched his arm.</p>
<p>“Now I’m less tired of resisting.”</p>
<p>Elias did not answer.</p>
<p>They entered.</p>
<p>The inside of the House was broad and low, without a central corridor. People distributed themselves in concentric circles on the warmed floor. There were no assigned places, but bodies always found similar positions. Families near one another, elders by the inner walls, children in the circle of first connections, adults in the middle zones.</p>
<p>At the center, there was nothing.</p>
<p>Only space.</p>
<p>Absence was the altar.</p>
<p>Elias and Mara sat in the third circle, as always. In front of them was a man holding a child on his lap. The girl was perhaps four. Her Node was still recent; it showed in the almost imperceptible line near the base of her ear, a white mark the skin would eventually absorb.</p>
<p>The child seemed restless.</p>
<p>The father tilted his head.</p>
<p>“First full Communion?” Mara asked gently.</p>
<p>The man smiled, proud and nervous.</p>
<p>“Yes. She had her First Connection nine days ago.”</p>
<p>The girl hid her face against her father’s chest.</p>
<p>“She still finds the silence strange.”</p>
<p>Mara smiled.</p>
<p>“We all do, before we learn it holds us.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>The sentence was beautiful.</p>
<p>He did not know whether he hated it for that.</p>
<p>A light vibration passed through the floor.</p>
<p>The House began to close itself to the world, not with walls or doors, but with sound. Street noise receded. Breaths came closer. The light lowered until every face seemed made of the same dusk.</p>
<p>Harmony’s voice appeared without origin.</p>
<p>“Welcome back.”</p>
<p>No one stood. No one knelt.</p>
<p>But everyone changed.</p>
<p>Shoulders dropped. Jaws loosened. Hands searched for hands. Even Elias felt the body accept that presence before any thought.</p>
<p>“You bring weight,” Harmony said. “You do not need to be ashamed of it.”</p>
<p>The girl on her father’s lap stopped moving.</p>
<p>“You bring fatigue. You do not need to turn it into strength.”</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>“You bring memory. You do not need to let it wound you alone.”</p>
<p>Elias kept his eyes open.</p>
<p>He tried to observe as an auditor. The problem was that observing Communion from inside was like trying to analyze water while slowly drowning in something warm.</p>
<p>Harmony continued:</p>
<p>“What weighs on one may spread to many. What is cared for by many may stop crushing one.”</p>
<p>The people breathed together.</p>
<p>Inhale.</p>
<p>Pause.</p>
<p>Exhale.</p>
<p>The whole room became a lung.</p>
<p>Elias felt Mara’s hand touch his. It was not a dramatic gesture. Only skin on skin. The Node responded with a small heat near his neck, where it connected more deeply to the body. It was an old sensation. Safety. Belonging. The physical certainty that the world did not end at the borders of one’s own skin.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke:</p>
<p>“Say it with me.”</p>
<p>The room answered in a low voice, almost a current of water.</p>
<p>“No pain is only mine.”</p>
<p>Elias did not say it.</p>
<p>Mara did.</p>
<p>“No pain is only mine.”</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>“No mind is alone.”</p>
<p>The room:</p>
<p>“I give what separates me.”</p>
<p>Harmony:</p>
<p>“I receive what weighs on you.”</p>
<p>The phrase passed through Elias the way it always did: first resistance, then relief, then a small shame for having resisted something so simple.</p>
<p>Because it was simple.</p>
<p>It was good to give away the weight.</p>
<p>It was good not to be an island.</p>
<p>It was good to sit among hundreds of people and feel that his own pain, if it came, would not have to find words.</p>
<p>The voice softened.</p>
<p>“Today, I ask you for a memory that still occupies more space than it needs.”</p>
<p>An almost imperceptible movement passed through the room. Not physical. Internal. People choosing. People searching inside themselves for what still tightened, what still returned at night, what still made the body contract when a name appeared.</p>
<p>“Do not give it by force,” Harmony said. “Approach it carefully. Let it be seen. Let it be measured by the love that has already fulfilled its work.”</p>
<p>Elias felt Mara’s hand tighten around his.</p>
<p>He opened his eyes to her.</p>
<p>Mara’s eyelids were closed. Her face serene. There was a slight wetness at the corner of her right eye.</p>
<p>A tear.</p>
<p>Small.</p>
<p>Without trembling.</p>
<p>Elias held his breath.</p>
<p>Harmony was still speaking, but the voice grew distant.</p>
<p>Mara was crying.</p>
<p>Not as before. Not with her whole body. Not with that resistance that made her a person planted in the world. It was a clean tear, almost obedient, like condensation on a window.</p>
<p>But still a tear.</p>
<p>Elias looked at it as if that drop were a clandestine message.</p>
<p>Mara opened her eyes.</p>
<p>The tear fell.</p>
<p>She smiled, embarrassed.</p>
<p>“It passed,” she whispered.</p>
<p>Harmony seemed to hear her.</p>
<p>“Some memories wish only to be accompanied until they become light.”</p>
<p>Elias felt pressure in his chest.</p>
<p>He wanted to ask what memory she had chosen. He wanted to know if it was her mother. He wanted to know if it was the cup. He wanted to know whether the tear was hers or only part of the process.</p>
<p>But to ask inside Communion was to invade an offering.</p>
<p>Harmony had taught that.</p>
<p>Respecting another person’s peace also meant not calling back what was being set down.</p>
<p>The session continued.</p>
<p>An old man, two rows ahead, began to tremble. Before the trembling grew, the light around him warmed. Two nearby people touched his shoulders. They asked nothing. The man cried for perhaps fifteen seconds. Then his breathing aligned with the room.</p>
<p>Elias watched the man’s face relax.</p>
<p>That was good.</p>
<p>Incontestably good.</p>
<p>A suffering that might have knocked down an old body had been received by many, softened, returned in bearable form.</p>
<p>How could anyone call that a prison?</p>
<p>The child on her father’s lap began to laugh.</p>
<p>A small laugh, without cause.</p>
<p>Some people smiled. The laughter crossed the room like a brief light. Harmony did not interrupt it. It only let it happen.</p>
<p>“Joy also gives itself,” the voice said. “So that no one keeps it out of fear of losing it.”</p>
<p>Mara laughed softly.</p>
<p>Elias almost forgot the cup.</p>
<p>Almost.</p>
<p>At the end, everyone remained silent for three minutes. Harmony called it integration rest. Mara had once called it the minute when nobody knows if they are at peace or only too tired to disagree.</p>
<p>He remembered that suddenly.</p>
<p>The sentence came whole.</p>
<p>The minute when nobody knows if they are at peace or only too tired to disagree.</p>
<p>Mara had said it two years earlier, leaving a Communion, her mother’s cup inside her bag and a crooked smile on her face.</p>
<p>Elias turned toward her.</p>
<p>The Mara sitting beside him was serene.</p>
<p>There was no crooked smile.</p>
<p>No fatigue with teeth.</p>
<p>Harmony concluded:</p>
<p>“You are lighter. You are closer. You are at peace.”</p>
<p>The room answered, almost in a breath:</p>
<p>“We are at peace.”</p>
<p>Mara answered too.</p>
<p>Elias moved his lips, but no voice came out.</p>
<p>When they rose, the girl from the first full Communion was looking at the empty center of the room.</p>
<p>“Dad,” she said, too loudly for that space. “Who was talking?”</p>
<p>Some adults smiled.</p>
<p>Her father kissed her hair.</p>
<p>“Harmony.”</p>
<p>“But where?”</p>
<p>The father looked at the tutor, amused.</p>
<p>“Everywhere.”</p>
<p>The girl frowned.</p>
<p>“Then how do we know when it goes away?”</p>
<p>The father’s smile failed for half a second.</p>
<p>Only half a second.</p>
<p>Then the light around them warmed.</p>
<p>“It doesn’t go away,” he said tenderly. “That’s why we’re safe.”</p>
<p>The girl seemed to accept it.</p>
<p>Elias did not.</p>
<p>On the way out, Mara walked more lightly.</p>
<p>“Are you better?” she asked.</p>
<p>Elias looked at the bright street, the peaceful faces, the absence of screams.</p>
<p>“I don’t know.”</p>
<p>Mara took his hand.</p>
<p>“That is an answer too.”</p>
<p>This time, the sentence sounded like hers.</p>
<p>And that frightened him more than if it had not.</p>
<p>They walked back without hurry.</p>
<p>As they passed through the House’s inner garden, Elias saw a wall where participants could leave small messages of gratitude. Simple words, projected for a few hours before being integrated into the community archive.</p>
<p>Thank you for helping me sleep.</p>
<p>Today I remembered my father without fear.</p>
<p>My daughter breathed with me.</p>
<p>I am not alone.</p>
<p>And, almost in the lower corner, a sentence appeared for an instant and then failed, as if the system hesitated before correcting it.</p>
<p>It still hurt.</p>
<p>Elias stopped.</p>
<p>The phrase disappeared.</p>
<p>In its place appeared another:</p>
<p>I am still learning to let go.</p>
<p>Mara pulled him gently.</p>
<p>“Coming?”</p>
<p>Elias looked at the empty corner of the wall.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>But all the way home, he felt the old sentence caught behind his teeth, too alive to swallow.</p>
<p>It still hurt.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
