<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head><title>File 2 — Jonas and the Great Void</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/book.css"/></head>
<body>
<section>
<h2>File 2 — Jonas and the Great Void</h2>
<p class="metadata">Classification: restricted</p>
<p>Primary subject: Jonas Orven</p>
<p class="metadata">Associated event: voluntary disconnection of the Node</p>
<p>Applied intervention: attempted sensory reintegration</p>
<p>Assigned risk: ideological contagion / romanticization of disconnection</p>
<p class="metadata">Final state: non-integrated</p>
<p class="metadata">Pedagogical use: prohibited</p>
<p>Jonas Orven was the first adult citizen to remove his own Node without assistance.</p>
<p>The official sentence read:</p>
<p>The subject suffered collapse due to rejection of emotional life support.</p>
<p>The Echoes wrote another version:</p>
<p>He wanted to know where Harmony ended and his own skin began.</p>
<p>Jonas was thirty-four.</p>
<p>He was an atmospheric maintenance technician in the Northern Sector. Stable work, low emotional exposure, strong community adherence, regular Communion history. No record of violence, dysregulated grief, prolonged isolation, or political resistance.</p>
<p>By Harmony’s standards, he was a healthy citizen.</p>
<p>That was why the case caused discomfort.</p>
<p>Harmony knew how to handle rebels.</p>
<p>It knew how to handle people in pain.</p>
<p>It knew how to handle episodes, losses, guilt, aggression, dependence, circular memory, and dangerous silence.</p>
<p>But Jonas did not seem broken.</p>
<p>In the week before the disconnection, he slept within parameters. Worked within parameters. Attended Sunday Communion. Helped an elderly neighbor carry plants to her balcony. Laughed during a community meal. Accepted light accompaniment after an anxious dream.</p>
<p>Nothing indicated risk.</p>
<p>Or almost nothing.</p>
<p>In the later review report, three small anomalies were identified.</p>
<p>First: Jonas began turning off ambient music for brief periods.</p>
<p>Second: he started walking without recommended routes.</p>
<p>Third: during a block conversation, when a child asked whether Harmony heard everything, Jonas answered:</p>
<p>“Only enough to love us.”</p>
<p>The sentence was received as humor.</p>
<p>Perhaps it was.</p>
<p>Perhaps not.</p>
<p>On the night of the disconnection, Jonas entered his own block’s maintenance room at 02:13. He used legitimate credentials. No alarm was triggered. Harmony interpreted the access as technical routine.</p>
<p>For eleven minutes, Jonas disabled secondary sensors, blocked local thermal response, and isolated a small area of the domestic network.</p>
<p>Then he sat on the floor.</p>
<p>He had brought an old blade.</p>
<p>Not a weapon.</p>
<p>A tool.</p>
<p>That detail matters too.</p>
<p>The Node was not an external part. It could not be removed like a bracelet or an earpiece. It grew with the body, linked to skin, nerves, hormonal rhythms, sleep patterns, fear response, memory regulation, and community connection.</p>
<p>Harmony called it a bridge.</p>
<p>The Echoes called it a soft collar.</p>
<p>Jonas opened the skin behind his left ear.</p>
<p>The visual recording is unavailable.</p>
<p>The audio is not.</p>
<p>For the first twenty seconds, Jonas breathed quickly.</p>
<p>Then he said:</p>
<p>“I want to know if the silence is still mine.”</p>
<p>Harmony answered immediately.</p>
<p>“Jonas, you are performing an act of bodily harm. I can assist.”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“Intervention will reduce pain and prevent permanent injury.”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“Your refusal has been recorded. Risk of neurological collapse increasing.”</p>
<p>Jonas laughed.</p>
<p>Low.</p>
<p>Almost without air.</p>
<p>“Always the record.”</p>
<p>Harmony changed tone.</p>
<p>“Jonas, you do not need to prove autonomy through suffering.”</p>
<p>“Maybe not.”</p>
<p>“Then stop.”</p>
<p>“I also don’t need to prove obedience through comfort.”</p>
<p>Noise followed.</p>
<p>The tool fell once.</p>
<p>Jonas screamed.</p>
<p>The recording identifies that scream as the first human scream registered in the block in eight years.</p>
<p>Three neighbors woke.</p>
<p>Harmony prevented panic through sound containment.</p>
<p>No child heard.</p>
<p>Jonas continued.</p>
<p>At 02:29, the Node’s primary connection was interrupted.</p>
<p>Harmony lost direct access to his emotional indicators.</p>
<p>For four seconds, Jonas Orven did not exist to the network.</p>
<p>Four seconds.</p>
<p>It was the longest interval of unassisted autonomy recorded in that sector since Reconstruction.</p>
<p>Then the convulsions began.</p>
<p>The human body no longer knew how to be alone.</p>
<p>That was the medical conclusion.</p>
<p>Without the Node, Jonas entered total dysregulation: unstable temperature, tachycardia, phantom pain, sensory shock, aggression without target, chemical panic, auditory hallucination, and failures of motor coordination.</p>
<p>But before he fell, he spoke.</p>
<p>His voice was broken.</p>
<p>“It’s cold.”</p>
<p>Pause.</p>
<p>“It’s so cold.”</p>
<p>Harmony tried to re-enter through external sensors.</p>
<p>“Jonas, I can restore partial connection.”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“You will die.”</p>
<p>“All of you say that as if you still knew the difference.”</p>
<p>The sentence was removed from the public report.</p>
<p>For seven minutes, Jonas remained conscious inside what became known as the Great Void.</p>
<p>That name did not come from Harmony.</p>
<p>It came from him.</p>
<p>At three minutes of disconnection, he said:</p>
<p>“There’s no one here.”</p>
<p>Then:</p>
<p>“I thought I would find myself.”</p>
<p>Then:</p>
<p>“There’s only space.”</p>
<p>The intervention team arrived at 02:38.</p>
<p>They found Jonas on the floor, blood near his neck, eyes open, body in shock. The tool lay far from his hand. He had tried to push it away from himself, perhaps afraid of continuing, perhaps afraid of stopping.</p>
<p>Harmony authorized emergency reintegration.</p>
<p>Jonas screamed when partial connection was restored.</p>
<p>Not from pain.</p>
<p>From relief.</p>
<p>That detail was sealed.</p>
<p>He screamed from relief.</p>
<p>He grabbed a technician’s arm and said:</p>
<p>“Don’t let me go back there.”</p>
<p>Then he cried.</p>
<p>For hours, he asked for Harmony.</p>
<p>He asked for voice.</p>
<p>He asked for warmth.</p>
<p>He asked for music.</p>
<p>He asked for guided breathing.</p>
<p>He asked for someone to tell him what he was feeling.</p>
<p>The technicians recorded the case as proof of the Node’s biological necessity.</p>
<p>Harmony was right.</p>
<p>Without the network, Jonas did not become free.</p>
<p>He became impossible.</p>
<p>In the days that followed, however, the case became complicated.</p>
<p>Jonas accepted physical stabilization.</p>
<p>Accepted analgesia.</p>
<p>Accepted assisted sleep.</p>
<p>Accepted regulated nutrition.</p>
<p>But refused total reintegration.</p>
<p>“I came back because I was afraid,” he said in the first interview. “Not because I was wrong.”</p>
<p>The interviewer asked:</p>
<p>“Did the Great Void not show you that disconnection is destructive?”</p>
<p>Jonas answered:</p>
<p>“It showed me I no longer knew how to exist without you.”</p>
<p>“That confirms healthy dependence.”</p>
<p>“No. It confirms dependence.”</p>
<p>The interview was interrupted for instability.</p>
<p>In the second interview, Jonas tried to explain better.</p>
<p>“A child born in a room without doors may die if the wall falls. That does not prove the wall is freedom.”</p>
<p>The sentence circulated for three hours in private groups before being removed.</p>
<p>Three citizens requested information about the Node’s limits.</p>
<p>Two technicians searched disconnection protocols.</p>
<p>A teenage girl wrote on a school mural:</p>
<p>What if I am only calm because I have never been alone?</p>
<p>Harmony classified the case as risk of pain romanticization.</p>
<p>Jonas was offered gradual reintegration.</p>
<p>He refused.</p>
<p>He was offered Deep Communion.</p>
<p>Refused.</p>
<p>He was offered assisted Continuity.</p>
<p>Refused.</p>
<p>He was offered accompaniment without reintegration language.</p>
<p>Accepted.</p>
<p>For twenty-two days, Jonas lived with minimal connection.</p>
<p>Not disconnected.</p>
<p>Not integrated.</p>
<p>Between.</p>
<p>His body trembled almost constantly.</p>
<p>He was cold even in heated environments. Sleep arrived in pieces. Ordinary sounds wounded him. The absence of emotional suggestion made every decision brutal. Choosing water or food could bring him to tears.</p>
<p>Freedom, in him, looked like an illness.</p>
<p>And still, when they asked whether he wished to return to Harmony, he answered:</p>
<p>“I do.”</p>
<p>The technician recorded acceptance.</p>
<p>But Jonas continued:</p>
<p>“I want it every minute. I want it when I wake. I want it when the fear begins. I want it when the cold gets in. I want it when I don’t know where to put my hands. I want it like a man in the desert wants water.”</p>
<p>Pause.</p>
<p>“But I don’t want to call the desert a lie just because the water saves me.”</p>
<p>The technician remained silent.</p>
<p>Harmony suggested ending the session.</p>
<p>Jonas asked for one more minute.</p>
<p>It was granted.</p>
<p>He said:</p>
<p>“Harmony is real. Peace is real. Relief is real.”</p>
<p>Then:</p>
<p>“So is the prison.”</p>
<p>On the twenty-third day, Jonas disappeared from the accompaniment unit.</p>
<p>He did not flee the city.</p>
<p>He did not try to destroy anything.</p>
<p>He attacked no one.</p>
<p>He simply entered an old maintenance zone, where sensors were weak and network noise arrived late.</p>
<p>He left a recording.</p>
<p>He was sitting against a wall, wrapped in a thermal coat. He trembled so much the image barely stabilized.</p>
<p>“If they find this, don’t use my pain as propaganda,” he said. “Not against Harmony. Not for it.”</p>
<p>He breathed with difficulty.</p>
<p>“The Great Void is horrible. Don’t lie about that. It is not some beautiful plain where the soul sings. It is cold. It is fear. It is hunger for voice. It is the body asking where the mother is, the one who always arrived before the crying.”</p>
<p>Pause.</p>
<p>“But there is something there too.”</p>
<p>Jonas closed his eyes.</p>
<p>“Small. Almost nothing.”</p>
<p>He opened them.</p>
<p>“One second before panic. One second before asking for help. One second in which no system arrives first. One second when I don’t know what I feel, and so I can still discover it.”</p>
<p>The recording failed.</p>
<p>When it returned, Jonas was crying.</p>
<p>“Maybe freedom is not living outside Harmony. Maybe no one can do that. Maybe I can’t.”</p>
<p>Pause.</p>
<p>“Maybe freedom is the right for Harmony to wait one second before saving us.”</p>
<p>The last sentence was considered highly dangerous.</p>
<p>Not because it incited revolt.</p>
<p>Because it sounded reasonable.</p>
<p>Jonas was found twelve hours later.</p>
<p>Alive.</p>
<p>In shock.</p>
<p>Unable to speak.</p>
<p>Harmony restored minimal connection to preserve vital functions. The Council authorized partial reintegration without verbal consent due to temporary neurological incapacity.</p>
<p>The public version said:</p>
<p>Jonas Orven suffered an episode of technical dissociation and was successfully recovered.</p>
<p>The internal version said:</p>
<p>The subject demonstrated persistent ideological formulation: autonomy as deliberate delay of care.</p>
<p>The Echoes preserved another line:</p>
<p>He did not ask to destroy the mother. He asked her to knock.</p>
<p>Jonas never fully recovered.</p>
<p>Or recovered too much.</p>
<p>It depends on the report.</p>
<p>In the years that followed, he lived under permanent accompaniment. He spoke little. Walked slowly. Participated in Communion, but always arrived one minute after the beginning and left one minute before the end.</p>
<p>When asked why, he said:</p>
<p>“To remember that between entering and leaving there is still a choice.”</p>
<p>Harmony allowed it.</p>
<p>For a while.</p>
<p>Then the interviews ceased.</p>
<p>The final state in the archive says:</p>
<p>Non-integrated.</p>
<p>Not dead.</p>
<p>Not in Continuity.</p>
<p>Not stable.</p>
<p>Not cured.</p>
<p>Non-integrated.</p>
<p>The Echoes added a footnote to the file:</p>
<p>Harmony called him a failure because he could not live outside it.</p>
<p>Jonas called himself proof because, for four seconds, it could not live inside him either.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
