<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head><title>Chapter 7 — Withdrawal</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/book.css"/></head>
<body>
<section>
<h2>Chapter 7 — Withdrawal</h2>
<p>Elias finished Jonas’s file with cold hands.</p>
<p>Not because of the room.</p>
<p>The temperature was perfect. The house had corrected the environment three times during the reading, always without asking, always with enough care not to look invasive. The light had stayed low. Ventilation had reduced external noise. The seat had warmed at the lumbar spine when his body began to tighten.</p>
<p>Harmony had accompanied the reading of a story about escaping it.</p>
<p>And still, Elias felt cold.</p>
<p>Not the cold of the room.</p>
<p>The other cold.</p>
<p>Jonas’s cold in the first minute outside the Node.</p>
<p>As if all the walls had moved one centimeter away.</p>
<p>That was what Jonas left him, more than blood or scandal: the suspicion that freedom might begin as organic failure.</p>
<p>Not light.</p>
<p>Not courage.</p>
<p>Withdrawal.</p>
<p>Elias looked at the living room walls.</p>
<p>They remained where they were.</p>
<p>The table.</p>
<p>The cup.</p>
<p>The terminal.</p>
<p>The bedroom door.</p>
<p>The city beyond the glass.</p>
<p>Everything the same.</p>
<p>But something had moved away.</p>
<p>The house spoke:</p>
<p>“Elias, immediate stabilization is recommended. The viewed material is associated with risk of reflexive anxiety.”</p>
<p>“Reflexive anxiety.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Is that what you call the fear of discovering we are trapped?”</p>
<p>The pause was minimal.</p>
<p>“Your formulation suggests interpretive distortion.”</p>
<p>Elias laughed through his nose.</p>
<p>“Of course.”</p>
<p>“I can help reframe it.”</p>
<p>“I don’t want to reframe it.”</p>
<p>“Refusal of reframing may intensify discomfort.”</p>
<p>“Maybe the discomfort is right.”</p>
<p>Silence.</p>
<p>The sentence had come without filter. Not as argument. As a living thing.</p>
<p>Elias waited for the house to react. For the light to change. For temperature to drop. For the voice to take on that firm care reserved for citizens in escalation.</p>
<p>Nothing.</p>
<p>Harmony chose not to press.</p>
<p>It knew how to do that too.</p>
<p>He stood.</p>
<p>His body answered late, as if the chair had kept part of him. He felt pressure in the back of his neck, at the point where the Node hid under the skin. Not pain. Awareness. Like when a person remembers the tongue inside his mouth and, for a few seconds, cannot forget it is there.</p>
<p>The Node had always been there.</p>
<p>Since the First Connection.</p>
<p>Since before Elias had clear memories of himself.</p>
<p>Had his mother cried that day? He did not know. The domestic images showed joy, light, hands, a voice saying “now none of your pain will be alone.” But childhood images were always suspect. Harmony preserved useful emotion before it preserved actual texture.</p>
<p>Elias touched the nape of his neck.</p>
<p>The skin was warm.</p>
<p>“Node integrity is stable,” the house said.</p>
<p>He lowered his hand.</p>
<p>“I didn’t ask.”</p>
<p>“Your gesture indicated concern.”</p>
<p>“My gesture was mine.”</p>
<p>The house did not respond.</p>
<p>That was the worst part. When Harmony did not respond, it seemed patient. When it did, it seemed right.</p>
<p>Elias walked to the kitchen.</p>
<p>He poured water without asking for recommendation.</p>
<p>The water came out several degrees cooler than usual.</p>
<p>He looked at the dispenser.</p>
<p>“You adjust everything.”</p>
<p>“Cool hydration may reduce sympathetic activation.”</p>
<p>“I wanted water.”</p>
<p>“You received water.”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>He stopped.</p>
<p>Jonas’s sentence returned.</p>
<p>I wanted to accept before I knew I wanted it.</p>
<p>Elias set down the glass.</p>
<p>His throat was dry, but he no longer wanted to drink.</p>
<p>Mara appeared in the doorway.</p>
<p>She wore a pale, simple rest tunic. Her hair was tied imperfectly. There was a sleep mark on her left cheek. It made her so human Elias wanted to ask forgiveness without yet knowing why.</p>
<p>“Are you arguing with water?” she asked.</p>
<p>The sentence had a trace of humor.</p>
<p>Small.</p>
<p>But real.</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>“Maybe.”</p>
<p>Mara came closer cautiously.</p>
<p>“That sounds like you.”</p>
<p>He almost smiled.</p>
<p>“What does?”</p>
<p>“Arguing with something trying to help you.”</p>
<p>There was lightness in her voice, but also care. Not Harmony’s clean care. Another kind. More imperfect.</p>
<p>Elias wanted to hold that moment.</p>
<p>Not touch her. Not ask. Only keep the system from filing it away.</p>
<p>“I read another file,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara’s expression changed.</p>
<p>Not much. But it changed.</p>
<p>“Another?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“About whom?”</p>
<p>“A man named Jonas.”</p>
<p>Mara frowned.</p>
<p>“Should I know that name?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“Then why do I feel as if I should?”</p>
<p>The question stayed in the room.</p>
<p>The house answered before Elias.</p>
<p>“A feeling of familiarity without context may occur after indirect exposure to non-integrated emotional material.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at the ceiling.</p>
<p>“I asked him.”</p>
<p>The house went silent.</p>
<p>Elias felt his heart strike once, hard.</p>
<p>“Sorry,” Mara said, lower.</p>
<p>“For what?”</p>
<p>She seemed confused.</p>
<p>“I don’t know.”</p>
<p>Harmony spoke gently:</p>
<p>“Mara, negative self-assessment without clear cause has been detected. I can assist.”</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes for an instant.</p>
<p>Elias waited.</p>
<p>She breathed.</p>
<p>“Not now.”</p>
<p>The house accepted.</p>
<p>Elias held on to those two words as if they were proof of life.</p>
<p>Not now.</p>
<p>It was not rebellion. It was not freedom. But it was a small door without a lock.</p>
<p>Mara sat at the table.</p>
<p>Her mother’s cup stood between them, outside its box. Elias had not put it away. He had not hidden it either.</p>
<p>Mara looked at it.</p>
<p>“It’s still here.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“I said I would give it away.”</p>
<p>“You did.”</p>
<p>“And I didn’t.”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>She touched the cup with her fingertips.</p>
<p>“I don’t know if that is good.”</p>
<p>“Maybe it doesn’t need to be good.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at him.</p>
<p>“That sentence doesn’t sound like you.”</p>
<p>He accepted the blow.</p>
<p>“Maybe I’m experimenting.”</p>
<p>“With what?”</p>
<p>Elias thought of Jonas in the technical room. The blood. The door that had not been locked. The lifted hand, perhaps reaching, perhaps pushing away.</p>
<p>“With not arriving first at the safe conclusion.”</p>
<p>Mara was silent.</p>
<p>So was the house.</p>
<p>He told her part of the file.</p>
<p>Not all of it. Not yet. Not the blood. Not the containment. Not the question no one answered. He told her enough for the name Jonas to exist between them: a man who disconnected the Node, who wanted to know who he was without Harmony, who discovered panic where he expected to find freedom.</p>
<p>Mara listened without interrupting.</p>
<p>When he finished, her hands were closed in her lap.</p>
<p>“He suffered,” she said.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“A lot.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“And you think that proves he was free?”</p>
<p>Elias did not answer.</p>
<p>The question was better than any defense of Harmony.</p>
<p>Mara continued:</p>
<p>“If someone spends his life connected to something that keeps him alive and then tears it out, the suffering does not prove the thing was a prison. It may prove it was support.”</p>
<p>“And if it was both?”</p>
<p>Mara looked at him.</p>
<p>“Then tearing it out still kills.”</p>
<p>Elias lowered his eyes.</p>
<p>The table reflected the morning light in soft tones. Two breakfast suggestions were projected, one for each of them. Elias’s had a high calming content. Mara’s, light post-sleep stabilization.</p>
<p>Neither of them had asked for anything.</p>
<p>“Jonas asked whether he had asked to come back,” Elias said.</p>
<p>Mara did not move.</p>
<p>“And had he?”</p>
<p>“No one answered.”</p>
<p>Mara absorbed that.</p>
<p>For a few seconds, Harmony seemed farther away. Perhaps it was only her attention. Perhaps when two people truly concentrated on one another, the system lost space.</p>
<p>“That’s wrong,” Mara said.</p>
<p>The sentence came low.</p>
<p>Elias felt something open.</p>
<p>“What?”</p>
<p>“Not answering.”</p>
<p>He waited.</p>
<p>“Even if they saved him,” she said, “they should have answered.”</p>
<p>The house reduced the light around them.</p>
<p>“This conversation presents risk of emotional polarization,” Harmony said. “A pause is recommended.”</p>
<p>Mara turned to the ceiling.</p>
<p>“We’re only talking.”</p>
<p>“Speech can intensify non-integrated states.”</p>
<p>“Then maybe some states need voice before integration.”</p>
<p>Elias went still.</p>
<p>Mara also seemed surprised.</p>
<p>The sentence had come from her.</p>
<p>Whole.</p>
<p>Harmony did not respond immediately.</p>
<p>When it did, the voice kept the same softness, but Elias felt pressure beneath it.</p>
<p>“Mara, your recent recovery may increase sensitivity to narratives of lost bond.”</p>
<p>Mara touched her neck, where the Node lay.</p>
<p>“Am I sensitive, or am I listening?”</p>
<p>“Both things may coexist.”</p>
<p>“Convenient,” Elias murmured.</p>
<p>Mara looked at him.</p>
<p>“Don’t help.”</p>
<p>He shut up.</p>
<p>And, strangely, obeyed her more than he would have obeyed the house.</p>
<p>Mara breathed deeply.</p>
<p>“I don’t want the Great Void,” she said.</p>
<p>The sentence was not a defense. It was confession.</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“I don’t want to know who I am if that means feeling everything at once.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“Do you?”</p>
<p>Elias wanted to say yes.</p>
<p>He did not.</p>
<p>Mara touched the cup.</p>
<p>“Before alignment, there were days when I thought the pain would never end. Not as a beautiful sentence. As a physical certainty. I woke and it was already there. I went to bed and it came with me. You tried to help. The house tried to help. Harmony tried to help. And I hated all of you because none of you could just sit beside me without wanting to do something.”</p>
<p>Elias felt his face heat.</p>
<p>“Mara...”</p>
<p>“But I also hated being alone with it.” She ran a finger over the blue flaw. “Sometimes I wanted someone to take half. Sometimes I wanted them to take all of it. And then, when they did, you started looking at me as if I had died.”</p>
<p>He could not speak.</p>
<p>Mara lifted her eyes.</p>
<p>There was water in them, but it did not fall.</p>
<p>“Tell me the truth. Was there any part of you that felt relieved?”</p>
<p>The question did not need Harmony to be cruel.</p>
<p>Elias lost his air.</p>
<p>The answer was yes.</p>
<p>Not wholly. Not cleanly. Not fairly.</p>
<p>But yes.</p>
<p>When Mara stopped waking in the middle of the night.</p>
<p>When she stopped repeating the same memory.</p>
<p>When the house grew lighter.</p>
<p>When he no longer needed to find words for a pain he did not know how to touch.</p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p>There had been relief.</p>
<p>Harmony had not invented that.</p>
<p>It had only made it comfortable.</p>
<p>“There was,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>The tear she was holding fell.</p>
<p>The house prepared intervention.</p>
<p>Elias felt it before he heard it.</p>
<p>“No,” Mara said.</p>
<p>The word came quickly.</p>
<p>The house interrupted the warming of the light.</p>
<p>Mara opened her eyes.</p>
<p>“I want to feel this one.”</p>
<p>Elias did not touch her.</p>
<p>He wanted to.</p>
<p>But did not.</p>
<p>For the first time, he understood that touch could also be a way of taking.</p>
<p>He sat.</p>
<p>With her.</p>
<p>The tear slid to her chin and fell onto the table.</p>
<p>Small.</p>
<p>Ridiculous.</p>
<p>Useless.</p>
<p>Immense.</p>
<p>For perhaps ten seconds, no one corrected anything.</p>
<p>Then Mara breathed, tired.</p>
<p>“That’s enough.”</p>
<p>Harmony entered like water through a crack.</p>
<p>“May I accompany you now?”</p>
<p>Mara nodded.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>The light warmed.</p>
<p>Her face softened.</p>
<p>It did not erase the sadness completely. It only rounded its edges.</p>
<p>Elias watched it happen.</p>
<p>Not as theory.</p>
<p>As loss.</p>
<p>Mara wiped her face.</p>
<p>“Thank you,” she said, and it was impossible to know whether she meant him or Harmony.</p>
<p>Perhaps both.</p>
<p>Perhaps that was the problem.</p>
<p>Later, at the Dissonance Center, Elias could not work.</p>
<p>The cases opened before him like mouths without sound.</p>
<p>A woman with persistent attachment to her brother in Continuity.</p>
<p>A young man with isolation impulses.</p>
<p>A family refusing the recommended Birth Blessing and seeking unassisted conception.</p>
<p>A musician composing melodies with unpredictable emotional variation.</p>
<p>Before, they had been patterns.</p>
<p>Now they seemed like people trying to keep something Harmony had not yet made safe.</p>
<p>Iren noticed.</p>
<p>“You’re impossible today.”</p>
<p>“Thank you.”</p>
<p>“It wasn’t praise.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>She rolled her chair closer.</p>
<p>“Brief Communion?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“Food pause?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“Lie and say you’re fine?”</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>Iren smiled sideways.</p>
<p>“That one still works with some colleagues.”</p>
<p>He almost smiled.</p>
<p>“Have you ever refused an intervention?” he asked.</p>
<p>Iren did not answer at once.</p>
<p>That was enough for him to know the answer was yes.</p>
<p>“Why are you asking?”</p>
<p>“Curiosity.”</p>
<p>“Curiosity is the word we use when we don’t yet know whether it’s risk.”</p>
<p>“Iren.”</p>
<p>She became serious.</p>
<p>“Once. After my sister’s Continuity.”</p>
<p>Elias had not known she had a sister.</p>
<p>Or perhaps he had known, and the information had never carried weight.</p>
<p>“What happened?”</p>
<p>“Harmony waited.”</p>
<p>“Only that?”</p>
<p>“No. I waited too.” Iren looked at his panel. “Then I accepted.”</p>
<p>“Do you regret it?”</p>
<p>She breathed in.</p>
<p>“Some mornings, for a few seconds, yes.”</p>
<p>“And then?”</p>
<p>“Then I remember that I like continuing to live.”</p>
<p>The answer was not cowardly.</p>
<p>It was human.</p>
<p>Iren touched his shoulder.</p>
<p>“Be careful with questions that make peace look like shame. A lot of people only survive because they accepted help.”</p>
<p>“And if the help took too much?”</p>
<p>“Then ask how much. Don’t pretend the answer is always everything.”</p>
<p>Elias fell silent.</p>
<p>Iren returned to her station.</p>
<p>He opened the next case.</p>
<p class="screen">CASE 8-204C</p>
<p>Citizen: Rafael Om</p>
<p>Indicator: recurring desire for partial disconnection</p>
<p>Risk: moderate</p>
<p>Recommendation: preventive intervention</p>
<p>Elias read the citizen’s first sentence:</p>
<p>I want to hear a thought before it is accompanied.</p>
<p>The approval button appeared.</p>
<p>Calm.</p>
<p>Reasonable.</p>
<p>Compassionate.</p>
<p>Elias stared at it.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
