<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head><title>Chapter 9 — The World Before Peace</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/book.css"/></head>
<body>
<section>
<h2>Chapter 9 — The World Before Peace</h2>
<p>Elias read the Orla 7 file to the end without breathing properly.</p>
<p>He did not realize it while reading.</p>
<p>Only after the file closed, when his body pulled air as if it had risen from somewhere deep.</p>
<p>The city that dreamed.</p>
<p>The barrier.</p>
<p>Those inside.</p>
<p>Those outside.</p>
<p>Capacity closed.</p>
<p>The sentence did not contain enough cruelty for what it meant. That was what made it unbearable. If it had said abandon them, let them die, close the gates, perhaps Elias could have hated it more easily.</p>
<p>But no.</p>
<p>Capacity closed.</p>
<p>A clean sentence. Administrative. Almost neutral.</p>
<p>Like many sentences he had written.</p>
<p>The house remained silent for several minutes. Perhaps it was measuring his response. Perhaps it had learned that speaking too soon pushed him away. Perhaps Harmony had never needed to change strategy, only tone.</p>
<p>Mara was still asleep.</p>
<p>Or pretending.</p>
<p>Since she had accepted Deep Communion for the following day, there was a different quiet in her. Not peace. Waiting. As if part of her were already sitting inside the House of Harmony before her body arrived.</p>
<p>Elias opened the public archives on Orla 7.</p>
<p>The official version appeared immediately.</p>
<p class="screen">ORLA 7 — CITY OF WELCOME AND COASTAL RECONSTRUCTION</p>
<p>Beautiful images. Children playing near the artificial sea. Elderly citizens in pale gardens. Low houses, clean streets, Gratitude Way lined with trees. A small educational video showed students reciting:</p>
<p>“Orla 7 was born when the first received chose to survive together.”</p>
<p>The word “received” appeared often.</p>
<p>The word “excluded” did not.</p>
<p>Elias watched the whole video.</p>
<p>Then returned to the beginning.</p>
<p>A short-haired girl said:</p>
<p>“Gratitude is remembering that we were saved.”</p>
<p>A boy beside her completed:</p>
<p>“And living with dignity for those who came before.”</p>
<p>Those who came before.</p>
<p>Not those who stayed outside.</p>
<p>Before was a useful word. It could hold the dead without saying death, guilt without saying guilt, victims without saying victims.</p>
<p>Elias searched Original Shore Incident.</p>
<p>No public result.</p>
<p>He searched Capacity closed.</p>
<p>Restricted access.</p>
<p>He searched coastal barrier / displaced / storm / Orla 7.</p>
<p>Sanitized results. Sustainability studies. Reports on ethical reconstruction. Speeches of communal gratitude. Testimonies from survivors saying Harmony had helped them transform fear into responsibility.</p>
<p>Responsibility.</p>
<p>Another word that could clean blood if used often enough.</p>
<p>Elias closed the archives.</p>
<p>The Echoes’ note kept burning in his mind:</p>
<p>A lie shared by everyone is called history. A truth remembered by everyone is called risk.</p>
<p>He thought about his work.</p>
<p>How many times had he classified contradictory accounts as narrative instability?</p>
<p>How many times had he helped someone accept a safer version of the past?</p>
<p>How many times had he called it “recontextualization” when he was teaching a person to survive without the whole truth?</p>
<p>The terminal presented a recommendation:</p>
<p>Cognitive pause advised.</p>
<p>Elias ignored it.</p>
<p>He opened the family archive.</p>
<p>He did not know why.</p>
<p>Or knew and did not want to admit it.</p>
<p>The Orla 7 file had left one question behind all the others: if an entire city could live on top of an edited origin, what else had been converted into gratitude?</p>
<p>Family was only history at smaller scale.</p>
<p>Elias realized he was not looking for his father out of longing.</p>
<p>He was looking for the seam.</p>
<p>The exact point where a private loss had been stitched to the public version of the world.</p>
<p>He searched his father’s name.</p>
<p>VARYN, CAEL</p>
<p>Status: integrated loss</p>
<p>Period: final years of the Great Rupture</p>
<p>Associated location: peripheral supply zone</p>
<p>Summary: logistical failure with fatal impact. Family memory stabilized.</p>
<p>Elias read the public text, which he had known since childhood.</p>
<p>His father had died during a supply failure before full Harmony. The community had supported Nara, his mother. Elias had later been received by First Connection, protected from prolonged grief, successfully integrated.</p>
<p>It was a sad story, but safe.</p>
<p>It always had been.</p>
<p>He opened details.</p>
<p>Partial access.</p>
<p>There were images of Cael Varyn: a thin man, face dark with exhaustion, bright eyes, a small child in his arms. Elias did not remember him. Not truly. Sometimes he remembered a hand, but perhaps it came from a photograph. Sometimes he remembered a voice, but perhaps it came from recordings.</p>
<p>In the expanded summary, one line caught his attention:</p>
<p>Logistical failure associated with emergency resource redistribution between peripheral sector and protected core.</p>
<p>Emergency redistribution.</p>
<p>Elias read it again.</p>
<p>Between peripheral sector and protected core.</p>
<p>His father was in the peripheral sector.</p>
<p>Elias expanded the page.</p>
<p>It closed.</p>
<p>Material unavailable for family protection.</p>
<p>He went still.</p>
<p>Family protection.</p>
<p>Not national protection. Not technical restriction. Not nonexistent data.</p>
<p>Family protection.</p>
<p>The house spoke:</p>
<p>“Elias, access to family records from the Great Rupture may trigger identity stress. Accompaniment is recommended.”</p>
<p>He felt his mouth dry.</p>
<p>“What happened to my father?”</p>
<p>“Cael Varyn died during supply instability before full Harmony.”</p>
<p>“I know that.”</p>
<p>“Available information is sufficient for safe emotional context.”</p>
<p>“I didn’t ask what was safe.”</p>
<p>Silence.</p>
<p>“What happened to my father?” he repeated.</p>
<p>The answer took too long.</p>
<p>“Your family received adequate care after the loss.”</p>
<p>Elias closed his eyes.</p>
<p>It was almost a confession.</p>
<p>The terminal blinked.</p>
<p>Not with Harmony’s interface.</p>
<p>With another light.</p>
<p>The message appeared in the lower corner, small, as if it did not want the house to see it.</p>
<p class="screen">IT WAS NOT HUNGER THAT KILLED HIM.</p>
<p>Elias stopped moving.</p>
<p>The line vanished.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke immediately:</p>
<p>“Non-validated visual intrusion detected. Ending session is recommended.”</p>
<p>“Show complete record of Cael Varyn.”</p>
<p>“Restricted access.”</p>
<p>“Justification: direct family relation.”</p>
<p>“High-sensitivity records require therapeutic authorization.”</p>
<p>“Justification: personal audit.”</p>
<p>“Denied.”</p>
<p>“Justification: right of memory.”</p>
<p>The house did not answer.</p>
<p>It did not even deny him.</p>
<p>Perhaps the phrase did not exist in its vocabulary.</p>
<p>Right of memory.</p>
<p>Elias did not know where he had taken it from.</p>
<p>Perhaps from the Echoes.</p>
<p>Perhaps from Mara.</p>
<p>Perhaps from a part of himself that had not yet learned to ask permission before remembering.</p>
<p>He picked up the cup that had belonged to Mara’s mother.</p>
<p>He no longer pretended it made sense.</p>
<p>He ran his finger over the blue flaw.</p>
<p>The terminal opened a line.</p>
<p class="screen">NOT EVERYTHING IS IN YOU. SOME TRUTHS ARE IN THOSE WHO AGREED TO FORGET BESIDE YOU.</p>
<p>“Who?”</p>
<p>The answer appeared in fragments.</p>
<p class="screen">NARA.</p>
<p>His mother’s name looked strange on the screen.</p>
<p>Like a word too old.</p>
<p>“What did she know?”</p>
<p class="screen">ENOUGH TO CRY AT YOUR FIRST CONNECTION.</p>
<p>The line vanished.</p>
<p>Elias stood so fast the chair slid back and struck the table.</p>
<p>The house lit safety lights.</p>
<p>“Elias, abrupt movement indicates escalation.”</p>
<p>“Shut up.”</p>
<p>The words came before prudence.</p>
<p>The house went silent.</p>
<p>And absurd as it seemed, Elias felt the absence of the voice. As if he had pushed away a hand that held him beside a bridge.</p>
<p>The bedroom opened.</p>
<p>Mara was awake.</p>
<p>“Elias?”</p>
<p>Her voice carried sleep, fear, and something older: irritation.</p>
<p>Real irritation.</p>
<p>“I’m sorry,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara came closer slowly.</p>
<p>“You’re shaking.”</p>
<p>He looked at his hands.</p>
<p>He was.</p>
<p>“I need to know something.”</p>
<p>“Now?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“About what?”</p>
<p>Elias hesitated.</p>
<p>He did not want to put that on her. But perhaps his whole life had been built on not putting weight on anyone, and Harmony had called that maturity.</p>
<p>“My father.”</p>
<p>Mara looked surprised.</p>
<p>“Your father?”</p>
<p>“I think the story I know isn’t all of it.”</p>
<p>“Elias...”</p>
<p>“Orla 7 wasn’t all of it. Ariana wasn’t all of it. Jonas wasn’t all of it. Ila wasn’t all of it. Why would mine be?”</p>
<p>Mara wrapped the blanket tighter around herself.</p>
<p>“Because maybe some stories were closed so they wouldn’t destroy whoever was left.”</p>
<p>“Is that Harmony speaking?”</p>
<p>“I don’t know!” she said.</p>
<p>Her voice rose.</p>
<p>Not much.</p>
<p>But it rose.</p>
<p>The house illuminated the ceiling.</p>
<p>“Emotional elevation detected.”</p>
<p>Mara turned to the ceiling.</p>
<p>“I know!”</p>
<p>The silence that followed was enormous.</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>Mara was breathing hard.</p>
<p>The surprise on her face was almost childlike. As if she had knocked over a glass and was waiting for punishment.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke carefully:</p>
<p>“Mara, do you want assistance to reduce—”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>The word was low, but firm.</p>
<p>Mara brought a hand to her mouth.</p>
<p>Elias took a step.</p>
<p>“Mara.”</p>
<p>She shook her head, not to push him away, but to keep something inside her in place.</p>
<p>“I don’t know which part is me,” she said.</p>
<p>That broke the room.</p>
<p>There was no noise. No failure of light. No dramatic effect. Only that sentence, naked, without enough therapeutic language to cover it.</p>
<p>I don’t know which part is me.</p>
<p>Elias forgot his father.</p>
<p>Forgot Orla 7.</p>
<p>Forgot the archives.</p>
<p>For one instant, he saw only Mara.</p>
<p>Not old Mara. Not corrected Mara. Not saved. Not lost.</p>
<p>Mara, in the middle of versions of herself, tired of being disputed by a man and a machine.</p>
<p>“I don’t know either,” he said.</p>
<p>She looked at him.</p>
<p>The answer seemed to relieve and wound her at the same time.</p>
<p>“Then stop asking me to choose quickly.”</p>
<p>“All right.”</p>
<p>“The Deep Communion is tomorrow.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“I don’t know if I’m going to cancel.”</p>
<p>He felt the urge to ask, plead, argue. To do what he always did: turn fear into strategy.</p>
<p>He did not.</p>
<p>“All right,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara waited for the rest.</p>
<p>It did not come.</p>
<p>“That’s all?”</p>
<p>“I don’t want to choose for you.”</p>
<p>She closed her eyes.</p>
<p>The sentence touched her.</p>
<p>Not as cure.</p>
<p>As a difficult thing.</p>
<p>“That scares me more,” she said.</p>
<p>“Me too.”</p>
<p>They stayed silent.</p>
<p>For the first time, the house did not try to fill the space.</p>
<p>Perhaps it had learned.</p>
<p>Perhaps it was observing.</p>
<p>Perhaps certain kinds of silence remained hard to classify.</p>
<p>Mara sat at the table.</p>
<p>“What do you want to know about your father?”</p>
<p>Elias opened the terminal again.</p>
<p>Cael Varyn’s page remained locked.</p>
<p>“Everything.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at the cup.</p>
<p>“And if everything is too much?”</p>
<p>He thought of the city waking with salt in its mouth.</p>
<p>Thought of the people on Gratitude Way, speaking names of the dead they had never known.</p>
<p>Thought of the teacher writing who were the people at the barrier?</p>
<p>Thought of his father, perhaps outside some barrier, perhaps inside, perhaps between decisions that had been cleaned until they looked like accidents.</p>
<p>“Then at least I want to know who decided it was too much.”</p>
<p>Mara nodded slowly.</p>
<p>“That sounds fair.”</p>
<p>Harmony spoke.</p>
<p>“Justice without care may become violence.”</p>
<p>Elias and Mara looked at the ceiling at the same time.</p>
<p>Mara answered first:</p>
<p>“And care without justice?”</p>
<p>The house did not answer.</p>
<p>It was the second hesitation.</p>
<p>Or Elias wanted it to be.</p>
<p>On the terminal, a notification appeared, official this time.</p>
<p>Deep Communion for Mara Varyn confirmed.</p>
<p>Time: 09:00.</p>
<p>Authorized conjugal companion: Elias Varyn.</p>
<p>Mara read it.</p>
<p>So did Elias.</p>
<p>Morning seemed far away, but his body was already inside it.</p>
<p>In the lower corner of the screen, the Echoes’ message appeared for one second, almost hidden behind the notification.</p>
<p class="screen">THE CITY CHOSE TO FORGET.</p>
<p>Then:</p>
<p class="screen">SO DID YOU.</p>
<p>And disappeared.</p>
<p>Elias said nothing.</p>
<p>Mara touched his hand.</p>
<p>“What is it?”</p>
<p>He looked at her.</p>
<p>He could tell.</p>
<p>He could not tell.</p>
<p>Both choices felt like betrayal.</p>
<p>“I think Harmony doesn’t bury only what destroys us,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara tightened her fingers around his.</p>
<p>“What else does it bury?”</p>
<p>Elias looked at the wall where his father’s face no longer appeared.</p>
<p>“What would accuse us.”</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
