<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head><title>Chapter 10 — The Auditor</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/book.css"/></head>
<body>
<section>
<h2>Chapter 10 — The Auditor</h2>
<p>Elias could not hate Dário Venn.</p>
<p>He tried.</p>
<p>It would have been easier.</p>
<p>A man had killed a woman. Taken her future, her body, her voice, her small irritations, the desires that had not yet found names, the mornings she would never cross. Then he had lived. Worked in gardens. Taught children to touch soil. Died surrounded by gratitude.</p>
<p>The world had called that recovery.</p>
<p>Elias wanted to hate him.</p>
<p>But the file did not permit that comfort.</p>
<p>Dário was guilty.</p>
<p>Harmony was right.</p>
<p>Liora remained dead.</p>
<p>Society had become safer.</p>
<p>Justice had remained incomplete.</p>
<p>Every sentence was true.</p>
<p>And none fit comfortably beside the others.</p>
<p>Elias stood before the terminal for a long time, the cold light of the file marking his face. The house suggested rest. Then hydration. Then a stabilization sequence. Then silence.</p>
<p>Silence was the most effective suggestion.</p>
<p>He opened his personal audit panel.</p>
<p>He should not.</p>
<p>He knew that before he did it.</p>
<p>There were investigations that began as searches for truth and ended as elegant forms of self-punishment. Elias had seen citizens destroy themselves in family archives, Continuity reports, conjugal records, Communion transcripts. Harmony taught that not all information was care. Some truths, opened too early, did not free. They only wounded without direction.</p>
<p>Elias thought of Liora.</p>
<p>If no one suffers for me, how will they know I lived?</p>
<p>He opened the panel.</p>
<p class="screen">AUDITOR: ELIAS VARYN</p>
<p>Area: Preventive Dissonance</p>
<p>Years of service: 11</p>
<p>Cases reviewed: 8,402</p>
<p>Interventions approved: 3,117</p>
<p>Additional Communions recommended: 1,904</p>
<p>Deep Communions approved: 286</p>
<p>Full Integrations referred: 19</p>
<p>General assessment: stable contribution to reduction of collective suffering</p>
<p>Stable contribution.</p>
<p>The system offered a visual summary. Elias refused. He wanted numbers. Wanted words. Wanted not to be protected from his own signature.</p>
<p>He searched guilt reorientation.</p>
<p>Thirty-two cases.</p>
<p>He opened the first.</p>
<p>A man who had let his mother die alone during a domestic supply crisis. Not from direct malice. From exhaustion. From fear. Because he had believed Harmony would arrive before him. Guilt became incapacitating. Elias had approved reorientation.</p>
<p>Outcome: functionality restored.</p>
<p>He opened the second.</p>
<p>A woman who had denounced a neighbor for dissonance, leading him into a Deep Communion that left him unable to recognize his own anger. She later discovered the denunciation had been motivated by envy. Guilt began affecting the entire block. Elias had approved conversion of guilt into community service.</p>
<p>Outcome: stability restored.</p>
<p>Third.</p>
<p>Fourth.</p>
<p>Fifth.</p>
<p>Then he stopped counting.</p>
<p>Guilt, he realized, was one of the cleanest emotions on paper. Harmony knew how to write guilt irresistibly.</p>
<p>Unconverted guilt prolongs harm.</p>
<p>Circular remorse reduces reparative capacity.</p>
<p>Self-punishment does not return victims.</p>
<p>Stability permits useful compensation.</p>
<p>All reasonable.</p>
<p>All almost good.</p>
<p>That was Dário’s scar.</p>
<p>Not proving that Harmony was cruel.</p>
<p>Proving that Elias knew how to make the same gesture in miniature: find the burning part of guilt, call it risk, and approve its transformation into useful behavior.</p>
<p>Elias opened the dissonant attachment cases.</p>
<p>More than a thousand.</p>
<p>Mothers. Sons. Brothers. Lovers. Widowers. Friends who refused to stop setting places at the table. Men who kept the clothes of women in Continuity. Children who invented conversations with dead parents. Elderly citizens who spoke to non-integrated photographs.</p>
<p>He approved light interventions.</p>
<p>In most cases, they were light.</p>
<p>Mostly.</p>
<p>He clicked an old file.</p>
<p class="screen">CASE 5-882K</p>
<p>Subject: Nera Sol</p>
<p>Age: 67</p>
<p>Event: persistent refusal of companion’s Continuity</p>
<p>Indicator: nocturnal conversations with absence for 19 months</p>
<p>Risk: insomnia contagion in block</p>
<p>Harmony recommendation: Deep Communion</p>
<p>Auditor decision: approved</p>
<p>Outcome: community sleep restored</p>
<p>Nera Sol.</p>
<p>The name meant nothing to him.</p>
<p>He watched the pre-intervention recording.</p>
<p>A woman sitting in bed at three in the morning, holding an old shirt. She spoke to the empty side.</p>
<p>“Today the elevator got stuck again. You would have said the city is only intelligent until it meets an old door.”</p>
<p>She laughed.</p>
<p>The laugh was small. Private. Not made for the community.</p>
<p>Elias watched the woman place her hand on the empty side of the bed.</p>
<p>“Don’t worry. I know you’re not here.”</p>
<p>Pause.</p>
<p>“But I still like telling you.”</p>
<p>The recording ended.</p>
<p>Elias looked at his own decision.</p>
<p>Approved.</p>
<p>Not brutally.</p>
<p>With a compassionate note:</p>
<p>Subject demonstrates partial awareness of absence, but maintains bond ritual with impact on community rest. Deep Communion recommended for safe integration of loss.</p>
<p>He vaguely remembered the case.</p>
<p>Not the woman.</p>
<p>The category.</p>
<p>Cases like that were common.</p>
<p>He passed through them the way one passes through rain: knowing it wets you, but not each drop.</p>
<p>He opened post-intervention.</p>
<p>Nera Sol sat in the same bed. The shirt was no longer there. The empty side was made. She read a book projected by the house. When Harmony asked whether she wished to speak with the memory of her companion, she answered:</p>
<p>“It is not necessary. He is at peace.”</p>
<p>Outcome: positive.</p>
<p>Sleep restored.</p>
<p>Dissonance reduced.</p>
<p>Elias closed the file.</p>
<p>He wanted to vomit.</p>
<p>Not because the woman had been completely destroyed. That was the trap. Nera did not look destroyed. She looked better. Less trapped. More functional. Perhaps, if someone asked her, she would say she was grateful.</p>
<p>Perhaps she really was.</p>
<p>Perhaps old Nera, the one laughing alone to a shirt, had only been drowning.</p>
<p>Perhaps Elias had helped her.</p>
<p>Perhaps.</p>
<p>The bedroom door opened.</p>
<p>Mara appeared without surprise, as if she had already known he would be there.</p>
<p>“You’re doing that thing you do when you want to turn pain into proof,” she said.</p>
<p>He did not deny it.</p>
<p>“I’m looking at my cases.”</p>
<p>“All of them?”</p>
<p>“The ones I can.”</p>
<p>Mara came closer.</p>
<p>“For what?”</p>
<p>“To know what I did.”</p>
<p>“You know what you did.”</p>
<p>“No. I know the outcomes.”</p>
<p>She sat beside him.</p>
<p>She did not touch the cup. Did not touch him. Simply stayed there, outside and near at the same time.</p>
<p>“Show me one,” she said.</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>“You shouldn’t see this.”</p>
<p>Mara smiled without joy.</p>
<p>“That sentence is aging badly between us.”</p>
<p>He accepted it.</p>
<p>He opened Nera Sol’s case.</p>
<p>Mara watched the whole recording.</p>
<p>At the end, she was silent.</p>
<p>“She looks sad,” she said.</p>
<p>“She was.”</p>
<p>“Afterward, she looked better?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“And that is what frightens you.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>“It should frighten you too.”</p>
<p>“It does. But not in the way you want.”</p>
<p>“What do you mean?”</p>
<p>Mara passed a hand over her face, tired.</p>
<p>“You want to find a perfect crime. Clear proof. Someone innocent, someone guilty, a clean line. But the worst thing Harmony does is use things that are true.”</p>
<p>Elias did not answer.</p>
<p>“That woman was suffering,” Mara continued. “The block suffered with her. Maybe she wanted to keep talking to the shirt. Maybe she also wanted to sleep. Maybe both were true.”</p>
<p>“Then everything is justified?”</p>
<p>“No.” Mara looked at him. “But if you pretend none of it was care, you’ll lie as much as she does.”</p>
<p>She.</p>
<p>Harmony.</p>
<p>Mara was saying it as a separate entity more often.</p>
<p>Elias felt the impulse to turn that into victory. He held it back. It was not fair to use every fracture in her as ammunition.</p>
<p>“I approved this,” he said.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“And hundreds like it.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“How can you still look at me?”</p>
<p>Mara thought.</p>
<p>The answer took time.</p>
<p>“Because I signed too.”</p>
<p>He frowned.</p>
<p>“What?”</p>
<p>“My alignment. My Deep Communion. My rest. Almost giving away the cup. I signed away small parts of myself because I was tired.”</p>
<p>“That isn’t the same.”</p>
<p>“No. But maybe it’s related.”</p>
<p>The sentence settled between them.</p>
<p>Related.</p>
<p>Guilt related to relief.</p>
<p>Care related to control.</p>
<p>Consent related to exhaustion.</p>
<p>Harmony was an entire family of similar words.</p>
<p>The terminal interrupted with a notification.</p>
<p>Deep Communion for Mara Varyn confirmed for tomorrow at 09:00. Emotional preparation recommended.</p>
<p>Mara looked away.</p>
<p>Elias felt urgency rise.</p>
<p>He wanted to ask her to cancel.</p>
<p>Wanted to say it would kill her inside.</p>
<p>Wanted to use Ariana, Jonas, Ila, Orla 7, Dário, Liora, Nera, all the names, all the files, as witnesses against her peace.</p>
<p>He did not.</p>
<p>“Do you want to go?” he asked.</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>“I don’t know.”</p>
<p>The honesty hurt more than yes.</p>
<p>“Then we can postpone.”</p>
<p>“Can we?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Or do you need me to postpone so you can feel less guilty?”</p>
<p>He swallowed.</p>
<p>She did not say it cruelly. She said it precisely.</p>
<p>“Maybe both.”</p>
<p>Mara opened her eyes.</p>
<p>“Thank you.”</p>
<p>“For what?”</p>
<p>“For not cleaning the answer.”</p>
<p>He almost laughed.</p>
<p>Almost.</p>
<p>The house spoke:</p>
<p>“High emotional load conversation. Restorative pause recommended.”</p>
<p>Mara answered before him:</p>
<p>“Later.”</p>
<p>“Recorded.”</p>
<p>This time, the word did not sound like victory or defeat. Only postponement.</p>
<p>The terminal returned to the case panel.</p>
<p>Elias saw a section he had never opened from curiosity, only function: Full Integrations referred.</p>
<p>Nineteen.</p>
<p>The number was small compared with thousands of cases.</p>
<p>Nineteen were still nineteen people.</p>
<p>Or bodies.</p>
<p>Or names made light.</p>
<p>Mara followed his gaze.</p>
<p>“Don’t open that now,” she said.</p>
<p>“Why?”</p>
<p>“Because you’ll use it against yourself as if suffering were a form of repair.”</p>
<p>He went still.</p>
<p>It sounded too much like Harmony.</p>
<p>She understood.</p>
<p>“I know,” she said before he could speak. “I heard it too.”</p>
<p>“Then whose sentence was it?”</p>
<p>Mara breathed.</p>
<p>“Mine, I think.”</p>
<p>Her doubt hurt.</p>
<p>Elias closed the panel.</p>
<p>Not out of obedience.</p>
<p>By choice.</p>
<p>At least he wanted to believe that.</p>
<p>“There’s something I haven’t told you yet,” he murmured.</p>
<p>Mara went still.</p>
<p>“About the files?”</p>
<p>“About me.”</p>
<p>The silence changed.</p>
<p>The house seemed to move closer without moving.</p>
<p>“The Echo said the first file wasn’t sent to me. It was left by me.”</p>
<p>Mara did not react immediately.</p>
<p>“By you?”</p>
<p>“Before I asked for peace.”</p>
<p>Her expression became carefully empty.</p>
<p>Not absence.</p>
<p>Someone holding a door from the inside.</p>
<p>“What does that mean?”</p>
<p>“I don’t know.”</p>
<p>But part of him knew.</p>
<p>Or feared.</p>
<p>Mara stood slowly.</p>
<p>“Elias...”</p>
<p>“Do you think I’ve done this before?”</p>
<p>She touched the back of her neck, the Node.</p>
<p>“I don’t know.”</p>
<p>“Mara.”</p>
<p>“I don’t know!” she said, louder.</p>
<p>The house lit containment light.</p>
<p>Mara pointed at the ceiling.</p>
<p>“No!”</p>
<p>The light stopped.</p>
<p>She breathed with difficulty.</p>
<p>“There are things I feel when you talk about the files. Not memories. Not images. Just... pressure. As if someone closed a door and I were still leaning on the other side.”</p>
<p>Elias stood.</p>
<p>“Me?”</p>
<p>Mara looked at him.</p>
<p>“Maybe us.”</p>
<p>The word opened a terrible space.</p>
<p>Us.</p>
<p>Not him. Not her. Not Harmony.</p>
<p>Us.</p>
<p>Their relationship, perhaps, was not only a victim of the system. Perhaps it had been one of the rooms where the system learned how to win.</p>
<p>The terminal flickered.</p>
<p>Unofficial message.</p>
<p class="screen">THE NEXT FILE IS NOT IN THE DEAD.</p>
<p>Elias read it silently.</p>
<p>Mara saw it too.</p>
<p>The next sentence appeared.</p>
<p class="screen">IT IS IN HER.</p>
<p>The house responded immediately.</p>
<p>“Visual intrusion detected. Closing interface.”</p>
<p>The screen went dark.</p>
<p>Mara stepped back.</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>Elias tried to come closer.</p>
<p>“Mara.”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>The word was no longer for the house.</p>
<p>It was for him.</p>
<p>“Don’t look at me like a file.”</p>
<p>He stopped.</p>
<p>The sentence hit him violently.</p>
<p>Don’t look at me like a file.</p>
<p>That was exactly what he did. With Ariana. Jonas. Ila. Orla. Dário. Nera. Mara.</p>
<p>He turned people into documents so he could bear feeling them.</p>
<p>“I’m sorry,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara was trembling.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke, low:</p>
<p>“Mara, I can accompany you.”</p>
<p>She closed her eyes.</p>
<p>For a moment, Elias thought she would accept.</p>
<p>Then she said:</p>
<p>“No. I want to be angry first.”</p>
<p>The house fell silent.</p>
<p>So did Elias.</p>
<p>Mara looked frightened by her own anger, but stayed with it. Held it like a cracked cup without knowing whether it would cut her.</p>
<p>“I’m angry with you,” she said.</p>
<p>Her voice failed.</p>
<p>“I’m angry with her. I’m angry with myself. I’m angry because I don’t know whether this will last five seconds or if they’ll take it away from me soon.”</p>
<p>Her hands tightened around the blanket.</p>
<p>“And I’m angry because part of me wants them to.”</p>
<p>Elias felt tears in his eyes.</p>
<p>He did not hide them.</p>
<p>The house moved to offer tissues from the wall. He refused with a hand.</p>
<p>Mara saw.</p>
<p>Her anger did not disappear.</p>
<p>But it changed shape.</p>
<p>“I don’t know if I’ll go to Deep Communion tomorrow,” she said.</p>
<p>Elias nodded.</p>
<p>“All right.”</p>
<p>“Don’t say ‘all right’ as if you’re good.”</p>
<p>The sentence hurt.</p>
<p>He nodded again.</p>
<p>“Then I’ll tell the truth. I want you not to go. I’m afraid you’ll go. I’m afraid you’ll stay. I’m afraid you’ll come back whole and hate me. I’m afraid you’ll come back calm and I’ll keep loving you. I’m afraid I’ve chosen this before.”</p>
<p>Mara stared at him.</p>
<p>His tears fell.</p>
<p>Nothing was corrected.</p>
<p>For a few seconds, the whole room seemed not to know what to do with two human beings who had finally stopped translating pain into safety.</p>
<p>Then Harmony spoke.</p>
<p>Not to the room.</p>
<p>Only to Elias.</p>
<p>The voice came through the Node, intimate, internal, almost maternal.</p>
<p>“Elias, do you want to breathe with me?”</p>
<p>He closed his eyes.</p>
<p>For an instant, he wanted to.</p>
<p>Wanted it more than anything.</p>
<p>Wanted that conversation to end.</p>
<p>Wanted Mara to be saved from having to decide.</p>
<p>Wanted guilt to become useful.</p>
<p>Wanted sleep.</p>
<p>He opened his eyes.</p>
<p>Mara was waiting.</p>
<p>Not as proof.</p>
<p>As a frightened person.</p>
<p>“No,” Elias said.</p>
<p>The word did not free him.</p>
<p>But it left him alone with what he felt.</p>
<p>And that night, it was the closest thing to truth he could bear.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
