<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head><title>Chapter 12 — Mara's Message</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/book.css"/></head>
<body>
<section>
<h2>Chapter 12 — Mara's Message</h2>
<p>Mara postponed the Deep Communion.</p>
<p>Harmony called it a temporary decision.</p>
<p>Elias, in silence, called it something he did not dare say.</p>
<p>Victory.</p>
<p>Then hated himself for it.</p>
<p>Mara had asked him not to turn the postponement into victory. She was right. It was not a flag. Not proof that she had chosen pain, freedom, or him. It was only a tired woman saying: not today.</p>
<p>But Elias felt his body cling to that today as if it were an open door.</p>
<p>Harmony did not insist during the morning.</p>
<p>That too was a form of insistence.</p>
<p>The house kept the light calm. The meal appeared without comment. Notifications were reduced. There were no phrases about care, no breathing invitations, no recommendations for emotional reconciliation.</p>
<p>The absence of intervention felt like generosity.</p>
<p>Elias knew it could also be containment.</p>
<p>Mara spent the morning by the window with the cup in her lap. She did not cry. Did not speak much. From time to time she ran her thumb over the blue flaw and seemed to listen to something too low to be sound.</p>
<p>Elias did not interrupt her.</p>
<p>He was learning slowly.</p>
<p>Near noon, the Dissonance Center sent a formal message:</p>
<p>Absence recorded. Family pause authorized for 24 hours. Reassessment recommended tomorrow.</p>
<p>Elias read the message three times.</p>
<p>Family pause authorized.</p>
<p>Even his collapse needed authorization to look like care.</p>
<p>He closed the panel.</p>
<p>Mara looked over her shoulder.</p>
<p>“Will they punish you?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“Will they observe you?”</p>
<p>“They already were.”</p>
<p>She turned back to the window.</p>
<p>“That’s a terrible answer.”</p>
<p>“It’s the most honest one I have.”</p>
<p>The city remained tranquil. Below, children crossed the central garden in small groups. A tutor walked beside them, but did not guide them by the hand. Harmony liked children to appear to choose the path.</p>
<p>One of them stopped to pick up a fallen leaf.</p>
<p>The tutor waited.</p>
<p>For an instant, the child looked at the leaf as if she had found a message.</p>
<p>Then laughed and ran to the others.</p>
<p>Elias thought of Ila Renn.</p>
<p>Mother, stay there. But stay outside.</p>
<p>He missed a child he had never known.</p>
<p>It was a strange kind of sadness. Perhaps dangerous. Perhaps useless. Perhaps, for that very reason, human.</p>
<p>“Elias,” Mara said.</p>
<p>“Yes?”</p>
<p>“When I postponed... did you feel relief?”</p>
<p>He answered without defending himself.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“And guilt?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Which came first?”</p>
<p>The question seemed simple.</p>
<p>It was not.</p>
<p>He thought of the exact second she had touched Postpone with accompaniment. The air had changed, his chest had opened, the world had seemed to delay loss for one day.</p>
<p>“Relief,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara nodded.</p>
<p>She did not look hurt.</p>
<p>That hurt him more.</p>
<p>“Thank you.”</p>
<p>“For telling the truth?”</p>
<p>“For not improving it.”</p>
<p>They fell silent.</p>
<p>In the afternoon, Mara fell asleep on the sofa.</p>
<p>It was not guided sleep. She had not requested rest. She simply leaned her head against the arm of the sofa, the cup still near, and dropped into irregular sleep. Her face, without the vigilance of consciousness, looked younger and more tired.</p>
<p>The house asked quietly:</p>
<p>“Do you want me to stabilize Mara’s sleep?”</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>Her forehead moved. Small contractions. Perhaps her body was dreaming.</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“Irregular sleep may increase emotional fatigue.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“I can reduce without altering dream content.”</p>
<p>Elias almost laughed.</p>
<p>“How do you promise that?”</p>
<p>The house did not answer.</p>
<p>He sat on the floor beside the sofa and waited.</p>
<p>Ridiculous, perhaps. Sitting there guarding the sleep of an adult woman against a house that only wanted to help. But for the first time, Elias understood that accompanying someone might be only that: staying near without entering.</p>
<p>Mara slept for twenty-three minutes.</p>
<p>She woke with a start.</p>
<p>“Everything’s all right,” Elias said.</p>
<p>She looked around as if she had returned from far away.</p>
<p>“I was in a room.”</p>
<p>“What room?”</p>
<p>“I don’t know. White. Small. There was a chair. I was speaking.”</p>
<p>“With whom?”</p>
<p>Mara touched her throat.</p>
<p>“Myself.”</p>
<p>The house lit a soft glow.</p>
<p>“Self-referential dreams after Deep Communion postponement are common.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at the ceiling.</p>
<p>“You ruin everything.”</p>
<p>The sentence left before she could measure it.</p>
<p>Elias stared at her, surprised.</p>
<p>Mara seemed surprised too.</p>
<p>Then she began to laugh.</p>
<p>Not much. Not freely. But she laughed.</p>
<p>The laughter trembled, almost became crying, then stayed halfway between the two. Elias wanted to laugh too, but feared frightening the moment.</p>
<p>The house remained silent.</p>
<p>Perhaps it was learning.</p>
<p>Perhaps it was waiting.</p>
<p>Mara wiped her eyes.</p>
<p>“Sorry.”</p>
<p>“Don’t apologize for that.”</p>
<p>“For calling our invisible caretaker annoying?”</p>
<p>“Especially for that.”</p>
<p>She smiled.</p>
<p>For a few seconds, Elias saw in her the woman who used to call Communion “the minute when nobody knows whether they are at peace or simply too tired to disagree.”</p>
<p>The sentence came with such force he almost said it.</p>
<p>He did not.</p>
<p>He did not want to turn Mara into proof.</p>
<p>“What were you saying in the dream?” he asked only.</p>
<p>Mara frowned.</p>
<p>“I don’t remember.”</p>
<p>The house answered:</p>
<p>“I can assist safe dream reconstruction.”</p>
<p>“No,” they said at the same time.</p>
<p>They looked at one another.</p>
<p>This time, Elias laughed.</p>
<p>So did Mara.</p>
<p>The laughter did not last long.</p>
<p>But it existed.</p>
<p>Toward evening, the living room terminal lit by itself.</p>
<p>Elias went immediately still.</p>
<p>Mara saw it too.</p>
<p>Harmony’s symbol appeared: the two incomplete circles touching at the center.</p>
<p>Then it trembled.</p>
<p>Mara pressed the cup to her chest.</p>
<p>“Is that it?”</p>
<p>“I think so.”</p>
<p>The house spoke, too calm:</p>
<p>“Non-validated visual activity detected. Distance from the terminal is recommended.”</p>
<p>Elias did not move.</p>
<p>Mara stood.</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>Her word was small, but direct.</p>
<p>Harmony adjusted the light.</p>
<p>“Mara, your current exposure may compromise the healthy postponement of Deep Communion.”</p>
<p>Mara took one step forward.</p>
<p>“Maybe I’m already compromised.”</p>
<p>The terminal flickered.</p>
<p>The official interface vanished.</p>
<p>The room cooled.</p>
<p>Text appeared on the screen.</p>
<p class="screen">ENCRYPTED TRANSMISSION</p>
<p class="screen">ORIGIN: NON-INTEGRATED PERSONAL ARCHIVE</p>
<p>Elias looked at Mara.</p>
<p>She was pale.</p>
<p>The first line appeared.</p>
<p>IF I EVER SAY I AM TOO WELL, DO NOT BELIEVE ME.</p>
<p>Mara put a hand to her mouth.</p>
<p>Elias did not breathe.</p>
<p>The next line came with gaps, as if every word had to cross dirty water.</p>
<p class="screen">DO NOT LET THEM CALL MY DISAPPEARANCE A CURE.</p>
<p>The house spoke, now firmer:</p>
<p>“Material of non-validated origin. Immediate closure recommended.”</p>
<p>No one moved.</p>
<p>The message continued.</p>
<p>ELIAS, IF YOU ARE SEEING THIS, IT MEANS I HAVE ALREADY STARTED AGREEING WITH THEM.</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>But the no was not for the message.</p>
<p>It was for the part of her that perhaps remembered.</p>
<p>The terminal showed an image.</p>
<p>Not clear.</p>
<p>A white room. A chair. Low light. Mara sitting. Hair longer, eyes red, face tired in a way the current version of her no longer allowed.</p>
<p>It was Mara.</p>
<p>But not this Mara.</p>
<p>The woman in the video looked directly at the camera.</p>
<p>“Elias,” she said.</p>
<p>The voice came broken.</p>
<p>Current Mara shuddered.</p>
<p>“If this reached you, then something is still left. I don’t know how much. I don’t know in whom. Maybe in you. Maybe in me. Maybe in what they call noise.”</p>
<p>Mara in the video laughed without humor.</p>
<p>“I no longer trust the word noise. Sometimes it is only truth speaking without authorization.”</p>
<p>Elias felt tears in his eyes.</p>
<p>The Mara beside him seemed made of glass.</p>
<p>In the video, the other Mara continued:</p>
<p>“They will tell you I accepted. And maybe I will. That is the worst part. Maybe afterward I will look at you and say I am better. Maybe I will be better. Maybe I will sleep. Maybe I will smile. Maybe I will stop hating mornings. Maybe I will be able to think of my mother without feeling as if someone opened a window in my chest.”</p>
<p>She stopped.</p>
<p>Swallowed.</p>
<p>“And maybe part of me wants that.”</p>
<p>Current Mara squeezed her eyes shut.</p>
<p>“But there is a difference between resting and being replaced by someone who does not know why she rested.”</p>
<p>The image failed.</p>
<p>When it returned, Mara in the video was closer to the camera.</p>
<p>“If I say the cup is only a cup, ask me why my mother put sugar in her tea.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at the cup.</p>
<p>Current Mara cried silently.</p>
<p>“If I say pain no longer serves any purpose, ask me who decided what pain was for.”</p>
<p>The house intervened:</p>
<p>“Mara, your emotional stability is approaching critical threshold. I can assist.”</p>
<p>Current Mara did not answer.</p>
<p>Mara in the video seemed to hear, though it was impossible.</p>
<p>“Do not let her arrive first at everything, Elias.”</p>
<p>The screen failed again.</p>
<p>The voice continued without image:</p>
<p>“And please, if I ask for peace... remember that maybe it is true.”</p>
<p>The image returned.</p>
<p>Mara in the video was crying.</p>
<p>“This is the part you will not want to hear. Maybe I will ask for peace. Maybe I will want to forget. Maybe I will choose Harmony because I am tired. If that happens, do not turn me into a saint. Do not turn me into a perfect victim. Do not use my pain to make yourself feel brave.”</p>
<p>Elias felt the sentence like a blow.</p>
<p>Current Mara opened her eyes and looked at him.</p>
<p>The woman in the video said:</p>
<p>“Love me enough not to lie about me.”</p>
<p>Silence.</p>
<p>Then:</p>
<p>“But also do not let my tired version erase my whole version without witness.”</p>
<p>The image began to degrade.</p>
<p>“There are other files. I did not find all of them. You found some before. I think so. I’m not sure. Harmony moves certainty first.”</p>
<p>She breathed badly.</p>
<p>“If one day I look at you and seem too peaceful, ask me if I still know how to be angry.”</p>
<p>Current Mara released a small sound.</p>
<p>Not a word.</p>
<p>A wound.</p>
<p>Mara in the video moved even closer.</p>
<p>“What still hurts, still lives.”</p>
<p>It was the first time the sentence appeared in her voice.</p>
<p>Not as motto.</p>
<p>As plea.</p>
<p>The screen darkened.</p>
<p>For a second, Elias thought it was over.</p>
<p>Then one final line appeared.</p>
<p class="screen">FILE 5 INCOMPLETE</p>
<p class="screen">MARA VARYN / PREVIOUS CYCLE</p>
<p class="screen">PARTIAL ACCESS</p>
<p>Previous cycle.</p>
<p>Elias felt the floor move away.</p>
<p>Mara read the line.</p>
<p>“Cycle...?”</p>
<p>The house answered with controlled urgency:</p>
<p>“The viewed content presents risk of identity fragmentation. Immediate assistance recommended.”</p>
<p>Mara turned to Elias.</p>
<p>There was terror in her.</p>
<p>True terror.</p>
<p>“I recorded this?”</p>
<p>“It seems so.”</p>
<p>“When?”</p>
<p>He could not answer.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke:</p>
<p>“Mara, your current memory does not contain this event safely. Attempting recovery without accompaniment may cause harm.”</p>
<p>Mara began breathing quickly.</p>
<p>Elias took a step, then stopped.</p>
<p>He did not know whether touching was help or invasion.</p>
<p>“Mara.”</p>
<p>She looked at him.</p>
<p>“I asked you not to let me disappear.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“But I also asked you not to lie about me.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Then tell me the truth.”</p>
<p>He felt fear.</p>
<p>“Which truth?”</p>
<p>“Do you want me to be that woman in the video?”</p>
<p>The question was not fair.</p>
<p>And so it was perfect.</p>
<p>Elias looked at the dark screen, then at Mara, the living woman before him, torn between what she had been, what she was, and what she might have asked to become.</p>
<p>“I want none of you to be erased,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara shook her head.</p>
<p>“That’s too beautiful. Say something ugly.”</p>
<p>He closed his eyes.</p>
<p>When he opened them, he said:</p>
<p>“Yes. Part of me wants that woman back.”</p>
<p>Mara absorbed it.</p>
<p>“Even if she suffers?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Even if I can’t bear it?”</p>
<p>His voice almost failed.</p>
<p>“I don’t know.”</p>
<p>Mara fell silent.</p>
<p>The answer had been horrible.</p>
<p>But at least it was not clean.</p>
<p>She sat slowly on the sofa.</p>
<p>The house remained ready, waiting for permission.</p>
<p>Mara did not ask.</p>
<p>Elias sat on the floor, some distance away.</p>
<p>He did not touch her.</p>
<p>For a long time, neither spoke.</p>
<p>Then Mara whispered:</p>
<p>“I’m angry.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>“With me?”</p>
<p>“With you. With her. With myself. With Harmony. With my mother. With the cup. With peace. With everything.”</p>
<p>The house spoke:</p>
<p>“Prolonged anger can—”</p>
<p>“Shut up,” Mara said.</p>
<p>Harmony fell silent.</p>
<p>The silence that followed was not assisted.</p>
<p>It was naked.</p>
<p>Mara cried.</p>
<p>Not much.</p>
<p>Not well.</p>
<p>Not beautifully.</p>
<p>But she cried without asking for it to end.</p>
<p>Elias stayed there, on the floor, hands open on his knees.</p>
<p>For the first time in years, he did not try to solve the pain of a woman he loved.</p>
<p>He stayed.</p>
<p>Outside.</p>
<p>Near.</p>
<p>As Ila had asked her mother.</p>
<p>And perhaps that was not salvation.</p>
<p>But in that room, while the message from dead or old or whole Mara still trembled between them, it was the only thing that did not seem like a lie.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
