<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head><title>Chapter 13 — The Version That Suffers</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/book.css"/></head>
<body>
<section>
<h2>Chapter 13 — The Version That Suffers</h2>
<p>The next morning, Mara woke before the house.</p>
<p>Elias knew because the light did not change.</p>
<p>When Harmony woke someone, it did so in layers: first temperature, then the breathing of the air, then brightness, then a low sentence chosen according to the emotional weight predicted for the day.</p>
<p>That morning, nothing changed.</p>
<p>Mara simply opened her eyes.</p>
<p>Elias was awake on the sofa, where he had finally fallen asleep sitting up, a few meters from her. The cup remained on the table. The terminal was dark. The room held the strange quiet of places where something has happened and no one has cleaned yet.</p>
<p>Mara stayed still for a few seconds.</p>
<p>Then said:</p>
<p>“I’m still angry.”</p>
<p>Her voice was hoarse.</p>
<p>Elias straightened.</p>
<p>“All right.”</p>
<p>“Don’t say that as if it were a therapeutic achievement.”</p>
<p>“It wasn’t.”</p>
<p>“It sounded like one.”</p>
<p>He accepted it.</p>
<p>“Sorry.”</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>“I’m tired of apologies too.”</p>
<p>The house turned on a light glow, perhaps by habit.</p>
<p>Mara lifted her hand.</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>The light went out.</p>
<p>Elias looked at the ceiling.</p>
<p>Harmony accepted small refusals. Perhaps that was why people confused choice with freedom.</p>
<p>Mara sat up slowly.</p>
<p>She had slept little. Her face was swollen. There were marks beneath her eyes. She looked worse than the day before.</p>
<p>She looked more alive.</p>
<p>Elias hated noticing that he thought it.</p>
<p>Mara saw.</p>
<p>“There it is.”</p>
<p>“What?”</p>
<p>“That look.”</p>
<p>He lowered his eyes.</p>
<p>“What look?”</p>
<p>“The look of someone who saw a wound and called it proof.”</p>
<p>The sentence entered him without resistance.</p>
<p>“I didn’t mean—”</p>
<p>“You did. Not all of you. But part of you did.”</p>
<p>Elias did not answer.</p>
<p>Mara ran a hand through her hair, undid the badly tied knot, tied it again. The gesture had irritation in it. It was hers. Or seemed hers. Elias no longer trusted the pleasure he felt in recognizing those small disorders.</p>
<p>She stood and went to the table.</p>
<p>Picked up the cup.</p>
<p>For an instant, she held it as she had the night before, carefully. Then placed it back with something close to anger.</p>
<p>“I hate this,” she said.</p>
<p>“The cup?”</p>
<p>“I hate that now everything has to mean something.”</p>
<p>The house stayed silent.</p>
<p>So did Elias.</p>
<p>“Before, I suffered with it. Then it was only a cup. Now I don’t know what it is. You look at it as if it were an altar. Harmony looks at it as if it were risk. I look and feel I must choose a version of myself to please someone.”</p>
<p>“You don’t have to please me.”</p>
<p>Mara laughed without humor.</p>
<p>“Of course I do.”</p>
<p>“Mara.”</p>
<p>“Not in the old way. Not with food, smiles, those things. But I have to give you signs. A sentence from my mother. A tear. A refusal. A memory with edges. You pretend otherwise, but when I bleed a little, you breathe better.”</p>
<p>Elias felt his face burn.</p>
<p>It was unfair.</p>
<p>It was not false.</p>
<p>“That’s cruel,” he said.</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at him.</p>
<p>“Still true?”</p>
<p>He took time.</p>
<p>“Sometimes.”</p>
<p>The word remained in the room.</p>
<p>Sometimes.</p>
<p>Mara nodded, as if confirming something she had feared.</p>
<p>“Thank you.”</p>
<p>“Stop thanking me for being horrible.”</p>
<p>“I don’t thank you for being horrible. I thank you when you don’t hide.”</p>
<p>Harmony spoke for the first time:</p>
<p>“Honesty without containment may cause relational harm.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at the ceiling.</p>
<p>“You’re an expert in that.”</p>
<p>“May I clarify?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>The house went quiet.</p>
<p>Mara breathed deeply, but it was not Harmony’s guided breathing. It was irregular. Human. Ugly.</p>
<p>“I want to see it again,” she said.</p>
<p>Elias froze.</p>
<p>“The message?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Maybe that isn’t a good idea.”</p>
<p>“That sentence belongs to both sides, Elias.”</p>
<p>He closed his mouth.</p>
<p>Mara approached the terminal.</p>
<p>“Replay non-integrated personal archive,” she said.</p>
<p>Harmony’s symbol appeared.</p>
<p>“Content unavailable for emotional protection.”</p>
<p>Mara laughed.</p>
<p>“Of course.”</p>
<p>Elias stood.</p>
<p>“Mara, you don’t need—”</p>
<p>She turned.</p>
<p>“Do not finish that sentence.”</p>
<p>He stopped.</p>
<p>Mara touched the cup, the blue flaw.</p>
<p>Nothing happened.</p>
<p>She tried again.</p>
<p>Nothing.</p>
<p>The terminal remained clean, serene, obedient to the order to protect.</p>
<p>Mara squeezed the cup hard.</p>
<p>“Yesterday it opened for you.”</p>
<p>“Maybe because—”</p>
<p>“Because what? Because you’re freer? Because you were chosen by the dead? Because I’m the file and you’re the reader?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“Then open it.”</p>
<p>“I don’t control it.”</p>
<p>“Try.”</p>
<p>Elias approached carefully.</p>
<p>He did not want this to become a ritual. Did not want the cup to become a key in his hands, proof that Mara needed him to reach herself. That would be another prison, smaller and more intimate, but a prison all the same.</p>
<p>“Mara, if I touch it and it opens—”</p>
<p>“Then I’ll know that even my own pain has to pass through you.”</p>
<p>He stepped back.</p>
<p>The sentence was too precise.</p>
<p>“Then I won’t touch it.”</p>
<p>Mara stared at him.</p>
<p>Her anger shifted.</p>
<p>It did not disappear.</p>
<p>It changed object.</p>
<p>“Sorry,” she said, then immediately shook her head. “No. Not sorry. I’m angry and confused and I want to blame someone standing in front of me.”</p>
<p>“You can blame me.”</p>
<p>“Don’t be too generous. It looks bad on you.”</p>
<p>He almost smiled.</p>
<p>Almost.</p>
<p>So did Mara.</p>
<p>The almost between them felt more intimate than any touch.</p>
<p>She sat on the floor, back against the wall, cup in her lap. Elias stood, unsure what shape he should have.</p>
<p>“Yesterday I saw myself,” Mara said.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“But it didn’t feel only like a recording. It felt like... an accusation.”</p>
<p>“Against whom?”</p>
<p>“Me.”</p>
<p>Elias frowned.</p>
<p>“Against you?”</p>
<p>“She was so certain. So full of pain, but certain. Telling you not to believe me if I was too well. As if my future peace were betrayal.”</p>
<p>“She was trying to protect you.”</p>
<p>“Or trap me inside one version of her.”</p>
<p>That silenced him.</p>
<p>Mara looked at the cup.</p>
<p>“What if she was wrong?”</p>
<p>“The Mara from the video?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“About what?”</p>
<p>“About me.”</p>
<p>Elias did not answer.</p>
<p>“What if this version is also me?” Mara asked. “Not whole, maybe. But real. What if the peace she feared is not only a lie? What if I am not just an erased woman, but someone who survived another way?”</p>
<p>The question stayed between them with calm cruelty.</p>
<p>Elias realized he hated it because it had the right to exist.</p>
<p>Mara continued:</p>
<p>“You talk about my old version as if she were the true one. The one who suffers. The one who remembers. The one who says good sentences. The one who challenges you. The one who holds the cup as if it were a person. But I am here.”</p>
<p>She tapped her own chest.</p>
<p>“Me. This one. The one who sleeps better. The one who forgot some things. The one who maybe wants to stay forgotten. I wake too. I’m afraid too. I love you too, I think. I miss myself too, even without knowing who is missing.”</p>
<p>Her voice broke.</p>
<p>The house prepared intervention.</p>
<p>Mara lifted her eyes.</p>
<p>“Don’t even think about it.”</p>
<p>Harmony went still.</p>
<p>Mara turned back to Elias.</p>
<p>“Which of us has more right to live?”</p>
<p>He felt physically struck.</p>
<p>“I don’t know.”</p>
<p>“You don’t know, or you don’t want to say?”</p>
<p>“I don’t know.”</p>
<p>“Then how are you going to save me?”</p>
<p>The word save sounded almost obscene.</p>
<p>Elias sat on the floor, far enough not to occupy her space.</p>
<p>“Maybe I can’t.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at him.</p>
<p>“That is the first decent thing you’ve said today.”</p>
<p>He accepted the blow.</p>
<p>They sat in silence.</p>
<p>Outside, the city continued functioning. People woke, ate, went to work centers, took children to school, accepted small invisible helps. Life had not stopped to wait for Mara to decide which version of her deserved to remain.</p>
<p>Perhaps that was Harmony’s greatest power: the world always continued, as if one person’s pain were incapable of altering architecture.</p>
<p>“Elias,” Mara said.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“I want you to ask me something.”</p>
<p>“What?”</p>
<p>“Ask me if I want to see the rest.”</p>
<p>He understood slowly.</p>
<p>She did not want him to decide. Did not want Harmony to decide. She wanted to hear the question before accepting the answer.</p>
<p>“Do you want to see the rest?” he asked.</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>Her hand tightened around the cup.</p>
<p>“I do.”</p>
<p>The terminal lit.</p>
<p>Not through Elias’s hand.</p>
<p>Not through the blue flaw.</p>
<p>Through her answer.</p>
<p>The screen opened in irregular light.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke immediately:</p>
<p>“Mara, this choice presents high risk of emotional fragmentation.”</p>
<p>Mara kept her eyes closed.</p>
<p>“Record it.”</p>
<p>“Assistance recommended.”</p>
<p>“Record it.”</p>
<p>The house took time.</p>
<p>“Recorded.”</p>
<p>The screen trembled.</p>
<p>The image of previous Mara returned.</p>
<p>This time it was more degraded. Her face appeared in incomplete blocks. Her voice came with gaps.</p>
<p>“If you are seeing this by your own will,” said Mara in the video, “then perhaps there is still more of you than I feared.”</p>
<p>Current Mara opened her eyes.</p>
<p>The woman in the video breathed with difficulty.</p>
<p>“I will not ask you to choose my pain. That would be unfair. Pain makes people seem more honest than they are. Sometimes I used my pain to win arguments too. Sometimes I wanted Elias to feel small in front of it. Sometimes I called memory what was really fear of letting go.”</p>
<p>Current Mara began to cry.</p>
<p>Elias stayed still.</p>
<p>“But I will not apologize for having loved broken things,” the recording continued. “My mother lived in some of them. I lived in some of them. And there were days when a cup hurt me less than a room full of people trying to relieve me.”</p>
<p>The image failed.</p>
<p>When it returned, Mara in the video seemed to look more directly at the current version.</p>
<p>“If you, I, we... if one day you are too calm, ask only this: can you stay with one small pain without giving it away?”</p>
<p>Current Mara covered her mouth.</p>
<p>“It does not have to be everything,” the recording said. “You do not need to come back whole all at once. No one can bear that. Just keep one small pain. One that is yours. One Harmony does not turn into gratitude before you know its name.”</p>
<p>The recording choked.</p>
<p>“If you can, perhaps you are still there.”</p>
<p>The screen darkened.</p>
<p>Then another line appeared.</p>
<p class="screen">FILE 5 INCOMPLETE</p>
<p class="screen">SEGMENT 2 / MARA TESTIMONY</p>
<p class="screen">ACCESS CLOSED</p>
<p>Mara stared at the terminal.</p>
<p>The tears continued, but she did not tremble.</p>
<p>Harmony waited.</p>
<p>Elias waited.</p>
<p>Mara placed the cup on the floor between them.</p>
<p>“One small pain,” she said.</p>
<p>Elias did not answer.</p>
<p>She wiped her face with her sleeve.</p>
<p>“That sounds possible.”</p>
<p>The house spoke carefully:</p>
<p>“Mara, I can accompany that pain without removing it.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at the ceiling.</p>
<p>“How do I know?”</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>“You cannot know without trying.”</p>
<p>The honesty of the answer was worse than a lie.</p>
<p>Mara almost smiled.</p>
<p>“At least this time you didn’t pretend.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>“What do you want to do?”</p>
<p>Mara breathed.</p>
<p>“I want to try to remember one small thing.”</p>
<p>“Which?”</p>
<p>She thought.</p>
<p>“My mother’s voice when she was irritated.”</p>
<p>Elias stayed quiet.</p>
<p>It was not a beautiful memory. Not the sainted mother of grief. Not the cup, the sugar, the illness. Irritation. A living thing.</p>
<p>“Do you want me to stay?” he asked.</p>
<p>Mara looked at him.</p>
<p>“Stay.”</p>
<p>Pause.</p>
<p>“But stay outside.”</p>
<p>Ila’s sentence crossed the room.</p>
<p>Mara understood.</p>
<p>So did Elias.</p>
<p>He nodded.</p>
<p>“All right.”</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>For some time, nothing happened.</p>
<p>The city continued silently.</p>
<p>The house maintained temperature.</p>
<p>Harmony did not speak.</p>
<p>Mara frowned. First concentration. Then discomfort. Then something unexpected: a small laugh.</p>
<p>“She said my full name when she was angry.”</p>
<p>Elias smiled despite himself.</p>
<p>“What was it?”</p>
<p>“Mara Elian Varyn, do not put wet shoes in the kitchen again.”</p>
<p>Her laughter grew.</p>
<p>Not much.</p>
<p>But grew.</p>
<p>Then became crying.</p>
<p>The strange kind of crying that comes when memory does not know whether it is joy or loss.</p>
<p>Harmony remained silent.</p>
<p>So did Elias.</p>
<p>Mara cried for less than a minute.</p>
<p>When she opened her eyes, she looked exhausted.</p>
<p>“It hurt,” she said.</p>
<p>Elias felt the sentence like watching a candle light inside an enormous room.</p>
<p>“Do you want it to stop?”</p>
<p>Mara thought.</p>
<p>Then shook her head.</p>
<p>“No. It’s still with me.”</p>
<p>The house did not correct.</p>
<p>Harmony did not enter.</p>
<p>Elias did not touch.</p>
<p>For a few seconds, the small pain stayed where it was.</p>
<p>Not saved.</p>
<p>Not cured.</p>
<p>Not useful.</p>
<p>Only hers.</p>
<p>Then the terminal flickered again.</p>
<p>A new line appeared on the dark screen.</p>
<p>IF SHE CAN KEEP ONE, PERHAPS YOU CAN REMEMBER YOURS.</p>
<p>Elias read.</p>
<p>So did Mara.</p>
<p>“Yours?” she asked.</p>
<p>He did not answer.</p>
<p>The next line appeared.</p>
<p class="screen">FULL FILE 5 REQUIRES PREVIOUS CYCLE.</p>
<p>Elias’s chest closed.</p>
<p>Then came the final sentence:</p>
<p class="screen">FIND THE MAN WHO ASKED TO FORGET.</p>
<p>The room cooled.</p>
<p>Mara looked at him.</p>
<p>“Elias...”</p>
<p>He already knew.</p>
<p>Before opening any file.</p>
<p>Before proof.</p>
<p>Before memory.</p>
<p>He knew with a certainty without peace.</p>
<p>The man was no one else.</p>
<p>It was him.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
