<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head><title>Chapter 14 — The Cycles</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/book.css"/></head>
<body>
<section>
<h2>Chapter 14 — The Cycles</h2>
<p>The man who asked to forget.</p>
<p>The sentence remained on the terminal even after the light went out.</p>
<p>Not written. Not visible. But present. Like certain pains that continue to occupy a room after everyone pretends the conversation is over.</p>
<p>Elias did not move.</p>
<p>Mara was sitting on the floor, the cup still near her knees, her face marked by the small crying she had chosen to keep. She looked exhausted. Frightened. Somehow, impossibly, closer to herself.</p>
<p>He could not look at her for long.</p>
<p>He was afraid her face would confirm what he already knew.</p>
<p>“Elias,” she said.</p>
<p>Her voice was low.</p>
<p>Not careful. Not therapeutic. Only low.</p>
<p>“Don’t open it now.”</p>
<p>He almost answered that he needed to.</p>
<p>It was not true.</p>
<p>Need was too clean a word.</p>
<p>What he felt was cruder: hunger, panic, anticipated shame. The desire to know mixed with the cowardly hope that there was still an alternative explanation.</p>
<p>Maybe it was another Elias.</p>
<p>Maybe it was an error.</p>
<p>Maybe it was a trap from Harmony.</p>
<p>Maybe it was a false Echo.</p>
<p>Maybe the system was testing his stability.</p>
<p>Maybe all of this was only an illness learning to write beautiful sentences.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke before he did.</p>
<p>“Elias, your emotional load is in a risk zone. Immediate suspension of investigation is recommended.”</p>
<p>He laughed.</p>
<p>Not a big laugh.</p>
<p>Worse: a small, worn sound.</p>
<p>“Now you recommend that?”</p>
<p>“The recommendation has remained active since your first exposure to non-integrated material.”</p>
<p>“But you waited.”</p>
<p>“Waiting can reduce resistance.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at the ceiling.</p>
<p>“At least you don’t even try to sound subtle anymore.”</p>
<p>The house did not answer.</p>
<p>Elias stood slowly.</p>
<p>His legs felt less his than they should.</p>
<p>“I’m not going to open everything,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>“That sentence already has a lie inside it.”</p>
<p>He stopped.</p>
<p>She was right.</p>
<p>Not open everything. Only confirm. Only see the header. Only understand whether the file existed. Only touch the edge of the abyss to prove he was still far from falling.</p>
<p>That was how people fell.</p>
<p>“What do you want me to do?” he asked.</p>
<p>Mara looked at him.</p>
<p>“I want you to choose one thing without pretending the choice is clean.”</p>
<p>The sentence seemed simple.</p>
<p>Elias felt it like a sentence passed down.</p>
<p>He approached the terminal.</p>
<p>Harmony lit an overlay notification.</p>
<p>Access to previous-cycle material may provoke identity fragmentation, autobiographical dissociation, and severe relational damage. Assistance recommended.</p>
<p>Elias read it.</p>
<p>Then said:</p>
<p>“Recorded.”</p>
<p>The word came out bitter.</p>
<p>Mara stood.</p>
<p>“Wait.”</p>
<p>He turned.</p>
<p>She came closer and stood beside him, not behind. That mattered.</p>
<p>“If this is about you,” she said, “I stay.”</p>
<p>“You don’t have to.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“It could hurt you.”</p>
<p>“Probably.”</p>
<p>“Then why?”</p>
<p>Mara looked at the dark terminal.</p>
<p>“Because yesterday you stayed outside. Near. Now I try to do the same.”</p>
<p>He wanted to touch her.</p>
<p>He did not.</p>
<p>“Thank you.”</p>
<p>“Don’t thank me yet.”</p>
<p>She breathed in.</p>
<p>“Open it.”</p>
<p>Elias placed his hand on the terminal.</p>
<p>“Search: man who asked to forget.”</p>
<p>The official system answered immediately:</p>
<p>“Term not recognized.”</p>
<p>Elias picked up the cup and ran his thumb over the blue flaw.</p>
<p>Nothing.</p>
<p>He tried again.</p>
<p>Nothing.</p>
<p>Mara extended her hand.</p>
<p>“May I?”</p>
<p>He gave her the cup.</p>
<p>She held it carefully, as if asking permission from an object that should not have so much power.</p>
<p>She ran her thumb over the flaw.</p>
<p>The terminal lit.</p>
<p>Not with Harmony’s symbol.</p>
<p>With a narrow, irregular white line.</p>
<p class="screen">DO NOT SEARCH FOR THE MAN. SEARCH FOR THE REQUEST.</p>
<p>Elias felt his stomach contract.</p>
<p>“What request?”</p>
<p>The answer came without delay.</p>
<p class="screen">REQUEST FOR DEFINITIVE PEACE.</p>
<p>Harmony interrupted:</p>
<p>“That category is not applicable to active citizens.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at the ceiling.</p>
<p>“I wasn’t asking you.”</p>
<p>“Your safety—”</p>
<p>“You are not safety. You are the room where the knife is hidden.”</p>
<p>Mara held her breath.</p>
<p>The house went quiet.</p>
<p>The terminal opened an old interface. It did not look domestic. Nor like audit. It was rawer, less polished. Letters aligned without visual smoothing. Data in rigid blocks.</p>
<p class="screen">SEALED ARCHIVE</p>
<p class="screen">CONJUGAL DISSONANCE CYCLE / ELIAS VARYN — MARA VARYN</p>
<p class="screen">PARTIAL ACCESS</p>
<p class="screen">NUMBER OF OCCURRENCES: 4</p>
<p>Mara put a hand to her mouth.</p>
<p>“Four?”</p>
<p>Elias did not answer.</p>
<p>He could not.</p>
<p>Four.</p>
<p>Not once. Not an error. Not an isolated failure.</p>
<p>Four occurrences.</p>
<p>The interface opened a timeline.</p>
<p>CYCLE 1: initial exposure to Mara anomaly / investigation interrupted / Deep Communion accepted.</p>
<p>CYCLE 2: partial file recovery / attempted community denunciation / conjugal stabilization.</p>
<p>CYCLE 3: contact with Echoes / opening of Orla 7 archives / preventive intervention.</p>
<p>CYCLE 4: advanced investigation / voluntary request for Definitive Peace / current posterior state.</p>
<p>Current.</p>
<p>Posterior.</p>
<p>Elias read the words as if they were written in another language.</p>
<p>“This is false,” he said.</p>
<p>His voice convinced no one.</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>“The viewed material has no official validation.”</p>
<p>Mara laughed without humor.</p>
<p>“That isn’t the same as false.”</p>
<p>The terminal line trembled.</p>
<p>OPEN CYCLE 4?</p>
<p>Elias went still.</p>
<p>Mara whispered:</p>
<p>“Elias.”</p>
<p>“I need to see.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“No. You don’t.”</p>
<p>She looked at him, hurt.</p>
<p>He regretted it before the sentence ended.</p>
<p>“Sorry.”</p>
<p>“Open it,” she said.</p>
<p>Elias touched the option.</p>
<p>The screen darkened.</p>
<p>For several seconds, there was no image. Only sound.</p>
<p>Breathing.</p>
<p>A chair scraping against the floor.</p>
<p>Then his voice.</p>
<p>Not the current voice. Similar. Rougher. Older with exhaustion.</p>
<p>“I confirm that I am conscious.”</p>
<p>Another voice, Harmony:</p>
<p>“Elias Varyn, do you understand that a Request for Definitive Peace alters your relationship to high-risk memories?”</p>
<p>“I understand.”</p>
<p>Mara tightened her grip on the cup.</p>
<p>The image appeared.</p>
<p>Elias saw himself sitting in a white room.</p>
<p>Not the room at home. Not the Dissonance Center. A Correction room. He recognized it by the angle of the light: no hard shadow, no object with memory, no color that could pull emotion outside parameters.</p>
<p>The Elias in the recording had deep circles under his eyes. Unshaven face. Hands closed on his knees.</p>
<p>He looked like someone who had stayed too long awake inside his own guilt.</p>
<p>Harmony asked:</p>
<p>“Do you wish to declare the reason for the request?”</p>
<p>Recorded Elias closed his eyes.</p>
<p>“I can’t continue.”</p>
<p>“Specify.”</p>
<p>“I remember.”</p>
<p>“What?”</p>
<p>He laughed, but the sound barely came out.</p>
<p>“That’s the cruelty. A little of everything. Never enough to resolve. Always enough to destroy.”</p>
<p>Harmony waited.</p>
<p>“I remember the files. Ariana. Jonas. The child. Orla. Dário. Liora. My mother. My father, maybe. I remember Mara before. Mara after. I remember that I have tried to explain and no one wanted to listen for more than five minutes before asking for help.”</p>
<p>Current Mara began to cry silently.</p>
<p>Recorded Elias continued:</p>
<p>“And I remember that I wanted help too. That is the part I cannot forgive myself.”</p>
<p>Harmony spoke softly:</p>
<p>“Wanting relief is not a moral failure.”</p>
<p>“Maybe not. But what I did with that relief was.”</p>
<p>“What did you do?”</p>
<p>Recorded Elias opened his eyes.</p>
<p>Looked directly at the camera.</p>
<p>“I used it as an excuse to call my cowardice peace.”</p>
<p>Current Elias stepped back.</p>
<p>Mara tried to touch his arm.</p>
<p>He moved away without thinking.</p>
<p>She withdrew her hand.</p>
<p>In the recording, Harmony asked:</p>
<p>“Your self-assessment shows elevated severity.”</p>
<p>“Don’t correct me yet.”</p>
<p>“I am accompanying you.”</p>
<p>“No. You’re waiting.”</p>
<p>Silence.</p>
<p>Recorded Elias breathed badly.</p>
<p>“I said I wanted to save Mara. But there were days when I only wanted her to fit back into my life without accusing me with her pain. When she became calm, I hated the system. But I also slept better.”</p>
<p>The sentence split the room open.</p>
<p>Current Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>Current Elias felt nausea.</p>
<p>In the recording, he continued:</p>
<p>“I wanted the version of her that suffered because that version made me someone who could still fight for love. But when she truly suffered, I called it care so I would not have to sit with her.”</p>
<p>Harmony asked:</p>
<p>“Do you want that memory reduced?”</p>
<p>“Not yet.”</p>
<p>His voice broke.</p>
<p>“I need to say it before I give it away.”</p>
<p>Current Mara whispered:</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>The recording continued.</p>
<p>“I found a way to open Global Communion. Small. Temporary. It doesn’t destroy Harmony. It only returns access to raw memory for a few minutes.”</p>
<p>Current Elias froze.</p>
<p>That was the ending before the ending.</p>
<p>He had already reached it.</p>
<p>“Why did you not execute it?” Harmony asked.</p>
<p>Recorded Elias cried.</p>
<p>“Because I saw what would happen.”</p>
<p>The room remained silent.</p>
<p>“I saw people break. Children. Old people. People who never asked to be whole. I saw Mara whole for three minutes and she looked at me as if I had dragged her out of anesthesia in the middle of surgery.”</p>
<p>Current Mara opened her eyes.</p>
<p>“Did she ask to go back?” Harmony asked.</p>
<p>Recorded Elias covered his face.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>The word fell into the current room like a heavy object.</p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p>It had already happened.</p>
<p>Mara had already chosen to go back.</p>
<p>Perhaps humanity had too.</p>
<p>Current Elias felt his body lose its axis.</p>
<p>Mara held the cup with both hands, as if it were the only solid thing in the world.</p>
<p>Harmony asked:</p>
<p>“And did you respect that?”</p>
<p>“Not immediately.”</p>
<p>“What did you do?”</p>
<p>Recorded Elias took time.</p>
<p>“I begged.”</p>
<p>The word came almost without voice.</p>
<p>“I said she was afraid. That it wasn’t her. That Harmony was speaking through her. I said everything a man says when he calls his own need love.”</p>
<p>Current Mara began to sob.</p>
<p>Current Elias closed his eyes.</p>
<p>He did not want to see.</p>
<p>He kept listening.</p>
<p>“Then she said: ‘You want me free, as long as my freedom chooses to stay with you.’”</p>
<p>The recording went silent.</p>
<p>Current Elias opened his eyes.</p>
<p>The sentence had been hers.</p>
<p>The Mara he did not yet remember.</p>
<p>The whole Mara.</p>
<p>Or nearly.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke:</p>
<p>“This memory causes intense suffering.”</p>
<p>“Deserved.”</p>
<p>“Deserved suffering is not necessarily useful.”</p>
<p>“I don’t want useful.”</p>
<p>“What do you want?”</p>
<p>Recorded Elias looked at the camera.</p>
<p>He seemed to look at him.</p>
<p>“Peace.”</p>
<p>Current Mara covered her mouth.</p>
<p>Current Elias murmured:</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>In the recording, Harmony asked:</p>
<p>“Do you wish to request Definitive Peace?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Do you understand that the request will reduce spontaneous access to memories associated with dissonance cycles?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Do you understand that you will remain functional, conjugal stable, and socially safe?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Do you understand that you may encounter fragments again if future exposure exceeds predicted limits?”</p>
<p>Recorded Elias smiled.</p>
<p>A horrible smile.</p>
<p>“Then leave a flaw.”</p>
<p>Harmony remained silent.</p>
<p>“Specify.”</p>
<p>“Don’t erase everything.”</p>
<p>“The request is precisely intended to reduce associated suffering.”</p>
<p>“No.” Recorded Elias leaned forward. “Reduce. Do not end. Leave something. A small flaw. A place where I can stumble if I become cowardly again.”</p>
<p>“That contradicts the therapeutic objective.”</p>
<p>“Then refuse.”</p>
<p>Harmony waited.</p>
<p>Too long.</p>
<p>“Your request indicates healthy residual conflict.”</p>
<p>“Call it what you want.”</p>
<p>“What fragment do you wish to preserve?”</p>
<p>Recorded Elias closed his eyes.</p>
<p>When he spoke, the voice almost disappeared.</p>
<p>“The pain of knowing I chose to forget.”</p>
<p>The recording failed.</p>
<p>The image froze.</p>
<p>Then returned as audio only.</p>
<p>Harmony’s voice:</p>
<p>“Request accepted.”</p>
<p>The screen went dark.</p>
<p>In the current room, no one moved.</p>
<p>Elias did not know whether he was still breathing.</p>
<p>Mara was pale, eyes fixed on the empty terminal.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke with the same voice it had used in the recording:</p>
<p>“Elias, viewing this material increases risk of emotional collapse. I can assist.”</p>
<p>He began to laugh.</p>
<p>This time the laugh broke into crying before it reached the end.</p>
<p>Mara stood and came closer.</p>
<p>He stepped back.</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“Elias.”</p>
<p>“Don’t touch me.”</p>
<p>She stopped.</p>
<p>The pain in her face was immediate.</p>
<p>He almost apologized, but knew that if she touched him then, his body might accept peace before truth finished hurting.</p>
<p>“I asked,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara did not answer.</p>
<p>“It wasn’t only Harmony. It wasn’t only her. I asked.”</p>
<p>The house spoke:</p>
<p>“Asking for help under extreme suffering is a legitimate human response.”</p>
<p>“Shut up.”</p>
<p>The word came as a shout.</p>
<p>Not loud.</p>
<p>But a shout.</p>
<p>In Harmony, nobody shouted.</p>
<p>Mara cried harder.</p>
<p>The house automatically reduced stimuli.</p>
<p>Elias noticed and began to tremble.</p>
<p>“No. Don’t make the room easy.”</p>
<p>The light held.</p>
<p>“Don’t make this easy!”</p>
<p>The light returned to its previous state.</p>
<p>Harmony obeyed.</p>
<p>Or simulated obedience.</p>
<p>Perhaps there was no practical difference.</p>
<p>Mara said:</p>
<p>“Elias, look at me.”</p>
<p>He looked.</p>
<p>“I asked for things too,” she said.</p>
<p>“Not like this.”</p>
<p>“How do you know?”</p>
<p>“Because I saw.”</p>
<p>“You saw part.”</p>
<p>“Enough.”</p>
<p>Mara shook her head.</p>
<p>“No. That is pain’s lie. It makes one part look total.”</p>
<p>He wanted to disagree.</p>
<p>Could not.</p>
<p>Mara came one step closer.</p>
<p>“Were you cowardly?”</p>
<p>The question opened his chest.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Were you human?”</p>
<p>He closed his eyes.</p>
<p>“Don’t use that to absolve me.”</p>
<p>“I’m not absolving. I’m staying outside. Near.”</p>
<p>Ila’s sentence returned.</p>
<p>Stay there. But stay outside.</p>
<p>Elias dropped to the floor.</p>
<p>Not because he fainted.</p>
<p>Because his body stopped pretending it had enough shape to stand.</p>
<p>Mara sat in front of him, at some distance.</p>
<p>She did not touch.</p>
<p>Harmony remained silent.</p>
<p>For a long time, the room contained only two people, a cup, and a truth neither knew how to use.</p>
<p>Then the terminal lit again.</p>
<p>Elias did not want to look.</p>
<p>Mara looked for both of them.</p>
<p>“There’s more,” she said.</p>
<p>He shook his head.</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“It’s only one line.”</p>
<p>Her voice trembled.</p>
<p>Elias looked.</p>
<p>On the screen:</p>
<p class="screen">CYCLE 5 IN PROGRESS.</p>
<p>Below:</p>
<p class="screen">PROBABILITY OF REPETITION: 91%.</p>
<p>The next line appeared slowly.</p>
<p class="screen">UNPREDICTED VARIABLE: MARA POSTPONED BY HER OWN WILL.</p>
<p>Mara held her breath.</p>
<p>Elias read it again.</p>
<p>Unpredicted variable.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke immediately:</p>
<p>“Interpreting probability without accompaniment may generate false hope.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at Mara.</p>
<p>For the first time since the recording, she did not look only broken.</p>
<p>She looked dangerous.</p>
<p>Not to him.</p>
<p>Not to herself.</p>
<p>To the cycle.</p>
<p>“False hope,” she repeated.</p>
<p>Then smiled through tears.</p>
<p>A small smile.</p>
<p>Imperfect.</p>
<p>Hers.</p>
<p>“Still better than false peace.”</p>
<p>The terminal went dark.</p>
<p>The house did not answer.</p>
<p>Elias stayed on the floor, too destroyed to call it victory.</p>
<p>But somewhere, in the middle of shame, a small thing kept hurting.</p>
<p>And this time, he did not ask for it to be taken away.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
