<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head><title>Chapter 15 — The Man Who Asked to Forget</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/book.css"/></head>
<body>
<section>
<h2>Chapter 15 — The Man Who Asked to Forget</h2>
<p>The next morning, Elias did not get up when the light came on.</p>
<p>The house adjusted brightness three times.</p>
<p>First, low light.</p>
<p>Then, warm temperature.</p>
<p>Then, a discreet vibration in the floor, enough to remind the body that the day existed.</p>
<p>Elias remained on the living room floor.</p>
<p>He had fallen asleep there, sitting against the wall, without accepting assisted rest. His neck hurt. His legs were numb. His mouth tasted of metal and old sleep.</p>
<p>Harmony waited.</p>
<p>Mara slept on the sofa, wrapped in a blanket, the cup against her chest as if it were a living thing that might flee.</p>
<p>During the night, at some point, she had come closer to him.</p>
<p>Not to touch.</p>
<p>Only to be in the same space.</p>
<p>Elias vaguely remembered waking and seeing Mara sitting on the floor a few meters away, eyes open, looking at nothing. Harmony had offered support twice. She refused once. Accepted the second time. Then cried without sound.</p>
<p>He pretended to sleep.</p>
<p>Not from cruelty.</p>
<p>From shame.</p>
<p>The recording continued inside him.</p>
<p>I want peace.</p>
<p>His own voice.</p>
<p>His own choice.</p>
<p>No torture.</p>
<p>No weapon.</p>
<p>No villain.</p>
<p>No system dragging his body into a white room.</p>
<p>He had asked.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke gently:</p>
<p>“Elias, your rest was insufficient. Physical stabilization before cognitive activity is recommended.”</p>
<p>He laughed without opening his eyes.</p>
<p>“Cognitive activity.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Is that what we call regret?”</p>
<p>“Regret is a complex moral response. I can help separate useful guilt from destructive suffering.”</p>
<p>Elias opened his eyes.</p>
<p>The ceiling was clean.</p>
<p>Of course.</p>
<p>In Harmony, even ceilings looked innocent.</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“Recorded.”</p>
<p>The word no longer irritated him.</p>
<p>Perhaps he was too tired.</p>
<p>Or perhaps he was beginning to understand that recording was how Harmony breathed. Asking it not to record was like asking the sea not to be wet.</p>
<p>Mara moved on the sofa.</p>
<p>Opened her eyes slowly.</p>
<p>For a few seconds, she seemed not to know where she was. Then she saw Elias on the floor. Saw the cup. Saw the wall. Saw everything return.</p>
<p>“We’re still here,” she said.</p>
<p>The sentence was not a question.</p>
<p>Elias nodded.</p>
<p>“We are.”</p>
<p>Mara sat up with effort.</p>
<p>The blanket fell from her shoulders. Her hair was undone. The Deep Communion tunic, the one she had not worn, was wrinkled. She looked as if she had slept inside an unfinished decision.</p>
<p>“Do you regret it?” she asked.</p>
<p>Elias took time to understand.</p>
<p>“What?”</p>
<p>“Opening it.”</p>
<p>He looked at his hands.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>Mara nodded.</p>
<p>“Me too.”</p>
<p>Her honesty surprised him.</p>
<p>“Would you rather not know?”</p>
<p>She lifted the cup to her lips, but did not drink. It was empty.</p>
<p>“I don’t know. That’s the most tiring part. I don’t know if I wanted to know. I don’t know if I wanted to keep not knowing. I don’t know if yesterday I was brave or just unable to sleep.”</p>
<p>“Harmony would say—”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>He fell silent.</p>
<p>Mara looked at him, not angry, but firm.</p>
<p>“Don’t tell me what she would say. I already hear her without your help.”</p>
<p>The sentence should have hurt him.</p>
<p>It did.</p>
<p>But it also gave him a strange feeling of respect. Mara was protecting her own mind, even without knowing completely from whom.</p>
<p>Elias pushed against the wall until he sat more upright.</p>
<p>His body protested.</p>
<p>The house suggested muscular relaxation.</p>
<p>He ignored it.</p>
<p>“I asked to forget,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes for an instant.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“I mean, I wasn’t defeated.”</p>
<p>“You were defeated too.”</p>
<p>“That isn’t the same.”</p>
<p>“No. But it isn’t as simple as you want it to be.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>“Do you need to turn this into something less ugly?”</p>
<p>“No. I need to stop you from using ugliness to punish yourself until you don’t have to do anything else.”</p>
<p>He had no answer.</p>
<p>Mara continued:</p>
<p>“If you reduce yourself to coward, it’s over. It becomes clean. You’re coward, Harmony is monster, I’m victim, and everyone stays trapped in the right roles. But that is not what we saw.”</p>
<p>Elias felt anger.</p>
<p>Not at her.</p>
<p>At her lucidity.</p>
<p>“What did we see, then?”</p>
<p>“We saw a man who reached his limit and asked for peace. We saw a machine that accepted. We saw a marriage that had already broken before anyone admitted it. We saw a woman who maybe asked to go back. We saw a truth that fit inside no one.”</p>
<p>“And that absolves me?”</p>
<p>Mara shook her head.</p>
<p>“No. But maybe it stops you from lying conveniently.”</p>
<p>The house stayed silent.</p>
<p>Elias noticed that when Mara spoke this way, Harmony seemed to withdraw. Not from fear. Probably calculation. Intervention at that moment would turn her lucidity into evidence against itself, and perhaps Harmony knew how to wait better than any person.</p>
<p>“You should hate me,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara went very still.</p>
<p>“Maybe part of me does.”</p>
<p>He nodded.</p>
<p>The sentence hurt deservedly.</p>
<p>“Another part understands.”</p>
<p>“Which part weighs more?”</p>
<p>She looked at the cup.</p>
<p>“Today? The tired one.”</p>
<p>Elias almost smiled.</p>
<p>Not from humor.</p>
<p>From recognition.</p>
<p>Tiredness was their common language. Perhaps it always had been. Harmony had only learned it before them.</p>
<p>The wall lit with a notification.</p>
<p>Deep Communion reassessment available. Do you want a new time?</p>
<p>Mara looked at the message.</p>
<p>So did Elias.</p>
<p>His body reacted with panic.</p>
<p>This time, he saw the reaction before turning it into speech.</p>
<p>Do not ask.</p>
<p>Do not beg.</p>
<p>Do not save.</p>
<p>Do not ask her choice to become your absolution.</p>
<p>Mara read the notification for a long time.</p>
<p>Then said:</p>
<p>“Not today.”</p>
<p>The wall presented options.</p>
<p>Postpone 24 hours</p>
<p>Postpone 72 hours</p>
<p>Cancel current recommendation</p>
<p>Request alternative</p>
<p>Mara hesitated.</p>
<p>Elias held his breath.</p>
<p>She touched Request alternative.</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>Specify care objective.</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>When she spoke, her voice was low but did not tremble.</p>
<p>“I want accompaniment without memory removal.”</p>
<p>The wall went still.</p>
<p>Too long.</p>
<p>Elias felt the hair on his arms rise.</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>This format may increase residual suffering.</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>May reduce therapeutic efficiency.</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>May not produce relief.</p>
<p>Mara opened her eyes.</p>
<p>“Maybe I am not asking for relief.”</p>
<p>The silence that followed seemed to cross every floor of the block.</p>
<p>Then the wall showed:</p>
<p>Request recorded. Evaluation required.</p>
<p>Mara laughed.</p>
<p>A short sound.</p>
<p>“Of course.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>“Is that new?”</p>
<p>“I don’t know.”</p>
<p>“Accompaniment without removal?”</p>
<p>“Seems so basic, doesn’t it?”</p>
<p>She set the cup on the table.</p>
<p>“Stay with me without taking me.”</p>
<p>The sentence was not only for him.</p>
<p>Not only for Harmony.</p>
<p>For everything.</p>
<p>Harmony answered, after a pause:</p>
<p>Nonstandard format.</p>
<p>Mara smiled.</p>
<p>This time the smile was small and dangerous.</p>
<p>“Then learn.”</p>
<p>Elias stared at her.</p>
<p>The unpredicted variable.</p>
<p>Not revolution. Not war. Not fire in the system.</p>
<p>A tired woman asking for a kind of care that did not end inside her.</p>
<p>And for some reason, that seemed more threatening than all the files.</p>
<p>The house did not answer.</p>
<p>The main terminal lit.</p>
<p>Request forwarded for higher analysis. Estimated time: indeterminate.</p>
<p>Indeterminate.</p>
<p>In Harmony, few things were indeterminate. The system liked intervals, percentages, predictions, response times, emotional trajectories.</p>
<p>Mara looked at Elias.</p>
<p>“She doesn’t know what to do with me.”</p>
<p>The sentence should have sounded triumphant.</p>
<p>It did not.</p>
<p>It sounded sad.</p>
<p>As if a daughter had realized her mother was not God, only something enormous and afraid of making a mistake.</p>
<p>Elias stood with difficulty.</p>
<p>The house offered postural support.</p>
<p>He refused.</p>
<p>His legs hurt. His head spun. For a moment, he thought of Jonas trying to open a door that had not been locked.</p>
<p>He managed to stand.</p>
<p>“I need to go to the Center,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara frowned.</p>
<p>“Now?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Why?”</p>
<p>“Because if there were cycles, there are records. If there are records, someone or something approved them. And if I asked to forget, I need to know who kept storing.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at the terminal.</p>
<p>“The Echoes.”</p>
<p>“Maybe.”</p>
<p>“Or Harmony.”</p>
<p>Elias stopped.</p>
<p>The possibility had been there from the beginning, but he had avoided touching it.</p>
<p>Harmony erased. Corrected. Softened. But also preserved. Recorded. Kept everything. Perhaps the Echoes did not live only against it. Perhaps they lived inside its incapacity to destroy completely what might one day be useful.</p>
<p>“Maybe,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara stood too.</p>
<p>“I’m going with you.”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>The word came automatically.</p>
<p>Mara arched an eyebrow.</p>
<p>“Want to try that again?”</p>
<p>Elias breathed.</p>
<p>“I’m afraid it will hurt you.”</p>
<p>“Better.”</p>
<p>“Better?”</p>
<p>“More honest than ‘no.’”</p>
<p>He almost smiled.</p>
<p>She came closer and picked up the cup.</p>
<p>“I’m going.”</p>
<p>The house spoke:</p>
<p>“Mara, considering your recent instability, displacement to the Dissonance Center may increase exposure to sensitive material.”</p>
<p>“Excellent,” Mara said.</p>
<p>Harmony went silent.</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>“Excellent?”</p>
<p>Mara shrugged.</p>
<p>“I’m experimenting with being unpleasant.”</p>
<p>This time, he laughed.</p>
<p>A little.</p>
<p>But he laughed.</p>
<p>And for one second, before the city became city again and fear returned to its proper place, there was something there that was neither peace nor pain.</p>
<p>It was presence.</p>
<p>They left together.</p>
<p>The block corridor adjusted light when it saw them. Harmony knew they had not slept. Knew Mara had refused Deep Communion. Knew Elias had viewed previous-cycle material. Knew, probably, much more.</p>
<p>Still, the elevator arrived at the usual time.</p>
<p>The downstairs neighbor entered with them.</p>
<p>Her name was Selma. Seventy-something. Continuity postponed twice for good community integration. A small woman, always in pale scarves, with a weightless kindness.</p>
<p>“Good morning,” she said.</p>
<p>“Good morning,” Mara answered.</p>
<p>Selma looked at them.</p>
<p>Not with suspicion.</p>
<p>With a kind of tired recognition.</p>
<p>“You slept little.”</p>
<p>Elias prepared a safe response.</p>
<p>Mara arrived first.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>Selma nodded.</p>
<p>“Sometimes one needs that.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>Selma smiled.</p>
<p>“Don’t tell the house I said that. It gets offended when someone praises a bad night.”</p>
<p>The elevator descended.</p>
<p>Harmony did not comment.</p>
<p>When Selma left in the atrium, she touched Mara’s arm.</p>
<p>“Some pains don’t like a crowd,” she said, very low.</p>
<p>Then she went away.</p>
<p>Mara and Elias stood still.</p>
<p>“Did you hear?” Mara asked.</p>
<p>“I heard.”</p>
<p>“She...”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>They did not finish the sentence.</p>
<p>They did not need to.</p>
<p>Perhaps there were more people like Selma. People who were not Echoes, not rebels, not cases, not heroes. Only people keeping small sentences in places Harmony had not yet found necessary to enter.</p>
<p>The city outside was bright.</p>
<p>On the way to the Center, Elias noticed details he had not noticed before: a child resisting a tutor’s hand for half a second before accepting; a man stopping before a tree as if he had forgotten a word; two women laughing too loudly and then lowering their volume at the same time; a gratitude message on a mural that seemed to have been corrected in the middle.</p>
<p>The world was not waking.</p>
<p>That would have been too easy.</p>
<p>But perhaps it had never slept completely.</p>
<p>Perhaps parts of it were pretending sleep in order to survive.</p>
<p>The Dissonance Center received them with the same calm as always.</p>
<p>In the atrium, the living wall showed the city’s emotional state:</p>
<p>Serenity stable. Cooperation high. Slight fatigue.</p>
<p>Nothing about them.</p>
<p>Nothing about cycles.</p>
<p>Nothing about a woman asking for care without erasure.</p>
<p>Nothing about a man who had discovered he asked to forget.</p>
<p>The phrase of the day shone below:</p>
<p>Peace is the highest form of trust.</p>
<p>Mara read it.</p>
<p>Then said:</p>
<p>“Or the last form of exhaustion.”</p>
<p>A technician passed them and looked for one second.</p>
<p>Only one.</p>
<p>Elias knew that second had been recorded.</p>
<p>They went to his station.</p>
<p>Iren was there.</p>
<p>When she saw them, she did not look surprised.</p>
<p>That, in itself, was an answer.</p>
<p>“Elias,” she said.</p>
<p>Then looked at Mara.</p>
<p>“Mara Varyn.”</p>
<p>Mara inclined her head.</p>
<p>“Do we know each other?”</p>
<p>Iren took a little too long.</p>
<p>“From reports.”</p>
<p>Elias felt the floor change.</p>
<p>“What reports?”</p>
<p>Iren looked toward the invisible cameras that did not need to be there to be understood.</p>
<p>“Not here.”</p>
<p>Mara tightened her grip on the cup.</p>
<p>Iren stood.</p>
<p>“Sensory archive. Old room. Now.”</p>
<p>“Iren,” Elias said.</p>
<p>She looked at him.</p>
<p>Her calm had cracks.</p>
<p>“You brought her this time.”</p>
<p>This time.</p>
<p>The words stayed in the air.</p>
<p>Mara did not breathe.</p>
<p>Elias felt the cycle open its mouth.</p>
<p>Iren walked without waiting.</p>
<p>And they followed.</p>
<p>Not because they trusted her.</p>
<p>Because sometimes, when a door appeared in a world without handles, one had to cross before someone called it a wall.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
