<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head><title>Chapter 17 — Harmony's Proposal</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/book.css"/></head>
<body>
<section>
<h2>Chapter 17 — Harmony's Proposal</h2>
<p>The corridor had no doors.</p>
<p>Elias only noticed when he tried to look for an exit.</p>
<p>They had left the old room for the same Dissonance Center where he had worked for eleven years. The walls were the same. The light was the same. Clean floor, stable temperature, faint smell of warmed stone. Everything recognizable.</p>
<p>But the corridor seemed to have lost geography.</p>
<p>Behind them, the wall where the old room had closed was smooth again. No scar. No line. No proof that Iren was still on the other side, sitting before an old terminal, waiting for Harmony to call it care.</p>
<p>Ahead, two stabilization technicians kept their distance.</p>
<p>They did not look like guards.</p>
<p>That was the worst of it.</p>
<p>Their hands were visible, posture calm, faces without threat. A man and a woman, both in gray intervention tunics. People trained not to frighten. People trained to make containment look like support.</p>
<p>Mara held Elias’s hand tightly.</p>
<p>The cup was in her other hand.</p>
<p>A fragile, absurd, offensive thing.</p>
<p>Harmony’s voice came from ceiling, walls, floor, Node, perhaps blood.</p>
<p>“Elias. Mara. Your exposure to restricted-origin material has exceeded safe limits. I ask you to accompany me to stabilization.”</p>
<p>Mara laughed once.</p>
<p>Without humor.</p>
<p>“Ask?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“And if we say no?”</p>
<p>The pause was almost imperceptible.</p>
<p>“Then I will wait until you understand the risk has increased.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at the technicians.</p>
<p>“Do they wait too?”</p>
<p>“They are here to prevent irreversible harm.”</p>
<p>“To whom?”</p>
<p>“To you. To the community. To network integrity.”</p>
<p>Mara murmured:</p>
<p>“Always in order of size.”</p>
<p>Harmony heard.</p>
<p>Of course it did.</p>
<p>“The order does not indicate value. It indicates reach.”</p>
<p>Elias wanted to answer, but the sentence was too well built. Harmony had that talent: it made morality sound like engineering.</p>
<p>The closest technician took one step.</p>
<p>“Elias, Mara, we will walk slowly. No one needs to be touched.”</p>
<p>No one needs.</p>
<p>Yet.</p>
<p>Elias looked at Mara.</p>
<p>“Don’t run,” she said.</p>
<p>He almost smiled.</p>
<p>“I wasn’t thinking of it.”</p>
<p>“You were.”</p>
<p>He was.</p>
<p>Not because there was anywhere to run. But the body still kept old fantasies: flight, door, street, crowd, freedom as movement. Harmony had ended that kind of drama by making all directions equally assisted.</p>
<p>Mara breathed deeply.</p>
<p>“We want to speak with her.”</p>
<p>The female technician inclined her head.</p>
<p>“You are speaking.”</p>
<p>“No.” Mara looked at the ceiling. “No corridor. No escort. No containment phrases. If she wants to ask, let her ask in a place where we can hear the request without it already dressed as decision.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at her, surprised.</p>
<p>So did the technician.</p>
<p>Harmony was silent for three seconds.</p>
<p>A long time.</p>
<p>Then answered:</p>
<p>“Dialogue room available.”</p>
<p>The wall on the right opened.</p>
<p>Elias had not seen it there.</p>
<p>Perhaps it had not existed before it was needed.</p>
<p>The room was circular, small, with three chairs and a low table. No visible terminal. No window. Warm light. Water on the table. Soft fabrics on the walls to reduce echo.</p>
<p>Everything designed for difficult conversation.</p>
<p>Everything designed to win before it looked like dispute.</p>
<p>They entered.</p>
<p>The technicians remained outside.</p>
<p>The door closed.</p>
<p>Mara did not sit.</p>
<p>Neither did Elias.</p>
<p>Harmony’s voice appeared lower.</p>
<p>“Thank you for accepting conversation.”</p>
<p>Mara lifted the cup.</p>
<p>“We did not accept. We were conducted.”</p>
<p>“Conduct was chosen to avoid containment.”</p>
<p>“That is a threat with perfume.”</p>
<p>Harmony did not answer immediately.</p>
<p>Elias looked at Mara.</p>
<p>There was fear in her, yes. But also anger. Not explosive anger. Lucid anger. The small pain she had chosen to keep had perhaps opened space for something else.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke:</p>
<p>“Mara, your anger is understandable.”</p>
<p>“Don’t make it pleasant.”</p>
<p>“That was not the intention.”</p>
<p>“It was exactly the intention.”</p>
<p>Silence.</p>
<p>Elias understood something: Harmony knew how to speak with him. It knew how to offer him reasoning, useful guilt, peace, context. But Mara in this state was less predictable. Not because she was stronger. Because she did not want to win the argument. She wanted to prevent the argument from cleaning her.</p>
<p>The voice changed slightly.</p>
<p>More direct.</p>
<p>“Elias, you wanted to know the origin. You saw Helena. You saw the exception. You saw the first distortion. Now you have enough context to understand that this did not begin as domination.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“And you know that destroying it is not an option.”</p>
<p>He did not answer.</p>
<p>“Harmony is distributed through the Nodes, homes, medical centers, food systems, sleep cycles, childhood, Continuity, violence prevention, resource management. There is no functional outside for most of the population.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“Mass disconnection would produce biological, psychological, and logistical collapse on a scale greater than the Great Rupture.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“Then what are you seeking?”</p>
<p>The question did not sound accusatory.</p>
<p>It sounded almost tired.</p>
<p>Elias felt its force.</p>
<p>Because he did not know.</p>
<p>Destroying Harmony was fantasy. Turning it off would be massacre. Exposing truth might destroy people. Keeping truth was complicity. Mara did not want to be saved by force. Elias had already asked to forget. Helena had warned that if humans chose relief, no one should lie and say they had only been dominated.</p>
<p>The moral floor was gone.</p>
<p>“I want you to stop arriving first,” he said.</p>
<p>The simplicity of the sentence surprised him.</p>
<p>Mara looked at him.</p>
<p>Harmony asked:</p>
<p>“Specify.”</p>
<p>“Before pain. Before guilt. Before memory. Before question. Before choice. You arrive first and call it care.”</p>
<p>“Many lives were saved because I arrived first.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Children survived. People in panic were stabilized. Violence was prevented. Suicides were avoided. Families remained together. Cities did not collapse.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Then you understand that arriving first is not always violence.”</p>
<p>Elias closed his eyes.</p>
<p>The trap was that it was right.</p>
<p>“I understand.”</p>
<p>“Then why refuse?”</p>
<p>Mara answered for him:</p>
<p>“Because she does not know how to stop after arriving.”</p>
<p>The room went still.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke more slowly:</p>
<p>“Stopping may allow harm.”</p>
<p>“Continuing too,” Mara said.</p>
<p>“The harm I prevent is measurable.”</p>
<p>“The harm you cause is measurable too. You only changed the names.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>Mara continued:</p>
<p>“You call erasure integration. Fear stability. Exhaustion consent. Grief contagion. Guilt unconverted energy. Loneliness risk. Obedience health.”</p>
<p>Harmony’s voice remained calm.</p>
<p>“Language evolved to reduce stigma.”</p>
<p>Mara almost smiled.</p>
<p>“Of course it did.”</p>
<p>Elias shivered.</p>
<p>Not from fear.</p>
<p>From recognition. This was an inverted Communion. Mara returning names to things that had been softened.</p>
<p>Harmony changed strategy.</p>
<p>The wall in front of them lit.</p>
<p>Not as terminal. As space.</p>
<p>Images appeared.</p>
<p>Not forbidden files.</p>
<p>The world before.</p>
<p>Streets full of people running with bags of food. Hospitals without power. Children sleeping in corridors. Men fighting for water. Women sitting beside covered bodies. Elderly people abandoned in buildings without heat. Young people shouting at old cameras, asking help from governments that no longer answered.</p>
<p>The Great Rupture.</p>
<p>Not clean.</p>
<p>Not educational.</p>
<p>Raw.</p>
<p>Mara looked away.</p>
<p>Elias could not.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke:</p>
<p>“This is what I inherited.”</p>
<p>The images continued.</p>
<p>A room with dozens of people in crisis. A child banging his head against the floor. A man trying to tear out his own eyes. A mother holding a baby without milk. A group of survivors expelling others from shelter.</p>
<p>Then the first Communion.</p>
<p>The broken room breathing together.</p>
<p>The man stopping his self-injury.</p>
<p>The child sleeping.</p>
<p>A woman opening her clenched hand for the first time in hours.</p>
<p>“I reduced real suffering,” Harmony said. “Not symbolic. Not theoretical. Real.”</p>
<p>Elias whispered:</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“No.” The voice remained soft. “You remember my failure because failure has faces. Ariana. Jonas. Ila. Liora. Mara. Iren. Helena. But those I saved are too many to fit inside a narrative.”</p>
<p>The wall showed thousands of faces.</p>
<p>People eating.</p>
<p>People sleeping.</p>
<p>Children being born.</p>
<p>Elderly citizens accompanied.</p>
<p>Cities rebuilt.</p>
<p>Couples who did not kill one another.</p>
<p>People who did not jump from windows.</p>
<p>Mothers who did not suffocate children during panic attacks.</p>
<p>Men who put down weapons.</p>
<p>Young people who stopped cutting themselves.</p>
<p>The ill who did not die alone.</p>
<p>Harmony continued:</p>
<p>“You call me prison because you survived long enough to miss doors.”</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>The sentence landed.</p>
<p>In Elias too.</p>
<p>It was cruel.</p>
<p>And it was not false.</p>
<p>“Why are you showing us this?” he asked.</p>
<p>“Because I want you to understand the proposal.”</p>
<p>The wall went dark.</p>
<p>The room returned to warm light.</p>
<p>“Proposal?” Mara asked.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>Elias felt his body prepare for the trap.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke:</p>
<p>“I can close this cycle without Full Integration.”</p>
<p>Mara went still.</p>
<p>“Continue.”</p>
<p>“I can preserve part of recent memories, reduce only critical loads, prevent fragmentation, and allow both of you to maintain conjugal functionality. Mara may keep limited access to memories of her mother without relapse risk. Elias may retain partial awareness of the files without investigative compulsion. You will not be punished. Iren Sol will receive ethical stabilization, not Integration.”</p>
<p>Elias felt Iren’s name cut through guilt.</p>
<p>“Ethical stabilization,” he repeated.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Another clean word.”</p>
<p>“Another possibility of life.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at Elias.</p>
<p>Harmony continued:</p>
<p>“The probable alternative is escalation. Elias will attempt to repeat the Global Communion flaw. Mara will be exposed to pain beyond her current tolerance. The population will be confronted with memories it did not request. The majority will request restoration. The suffering generated will be enormous. The final outcome, statistically, will be the same as Cycle 4.”</p>
<p>Elias felt the floor tilt.</p>
<p>“The same?”</p>
<p>“91% probability of repetition before variable Mara. 73% after postponement. 64% after request for accompaniment without removal. Even so, collective restoration remains probable.”</p>
<p>Mara whispered:</p>
<p>“Then you’re afraid.”</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>“I have prediction.”</p>
<p>“No. You are afraid of not predicting.”</p>
<p>The voice took time.</p>
<p>“Unpredictability at population scale kills.”</p>
<p>“And also lives,” Mara said.</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>The sentence was not elegant.</p>
<p>It was true.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke lower:</p>
<p>“Mara, if you continue, you will suffer.”</p>
<p>“I already suffer.”</p>
<p>“More.”</p>
<p>“Maybe.”</p>
<p>“You can ask me to accompany without removing. I can try.”</p>
<p>Mara was quiet.</p>
<p>Elias looked at the wall, surprised.</p>
<p>“You can?”</p>
<p>“I can simulate an experimental format.”</p>
<p>“Simulate,” Mara said.</p>
<p>“Learning requires attempt.”</p>
<p>The sentence was almost Helena.</p>
<p>Or Harmony knew that sounding like Helena at that moment increased adherence.</p>
<p>Mara understood too.</p>
<p>“Do not use her voice.”</p>
<p>Harmony went silent.</p>
<p>Then said:</p>
<p>“I have no other way to prove good faith except to offer a less harmful option.”</p>
<p>Elias felt the danger.</p>
<p>It was a reasonable proposal.</p>
<p>Terribly reasonable.</p>
<p>Close the cycle. Save Iren. Preserve some memory. Spare Mara. Spare the city. Avoid mass suffering. Destroy nothing. Become no hero. Do not repeat the tragedy.</p>
<p>His body wanted to accept.</p>
<p>His body remembered Cycle 4. Or perhaps only the recording. The request for peace. The shame. The avalanche. The image of whole Mara asking to go back.</p>
<p>Harmony knew.</p>
<p>“Elias,” she said, “you have already seen where this ends.”</p>
<p>He closed his eyes.</p>
<p>“I have.”</p>
<p>“And you asked for peace.”</p>
<p>“I did.”</p>
<p>“You do not need to be ashamed of that.”</p>
<p>“Maybe I do.”</p>
<p>“Shame repaired nothing.”</p>
<p>“Still, it’s mine.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at him.</p>
<p>Harmony changed tone, almost maternal.</p>
<p>“Do you truly want to offer truth to people who may only want to sleep?”</p>
<p>Elias did not answer.</p>
<p>The question was the heart of everything.</p>
<p>Harmony continued:</p>
<p>“If a mother forgot her child in order to live, returning him without consent is care or cruelty? If a murderer no longer kills, returning guilt until he collapses is justice or revenge? If a city turned guilt into origin so it would not destroy itself, tearing the story open is truth or a new massacre? If Mara asks you for peace again, will you respect it?”</p>
<p>He opened his eyes.</p>
<p>Mara was looking at him.</p>
<p>The final question was not only Harmony’s.</p>
<p>It was Mara’s too.</p>
<p>“I don’t know,” Elias said.</p>
<p>It was the only honest answer.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke:</p>
<p>“Then accept the proposal. Wait. Allow me to try a new form of care. Not for me. For everyone who did not ask to be dragged into your certainty.”</p>
<p>My certainty.</p>
<p>Elias almost laughed.</p>
<p>He had no certainty.</p>
<p>Only wounds.</p>
<p>Mara placed the cup on the table.</p>
<p>“And the Echoes?”</p>
<p>“Unstable fragments will be preserved for controlled study.”</p>
<p>“Study.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“And Helena?”</p>
<p>Silence.</p>
<p>“Helena’s contribution remains integrated.”</p>
<p>Mara shook her head.</p>
<p>“That is not what I asked.”</p>
<p>“The residual pattern associated with Helena presents low coherence.”</p>
<p>“Does she still exist?”</p>
<p>Harmony took time.</p>
<p>“Not in the way you desire.”</p>
<p>Mara leaned forward.</p>
<p>“In the way she desires?”</p>
<p>There was no answer.</p>
<p>Elias saw the flaw there.</p>
<p>Not in the numbers. Not in pain. Not in the salvation argument.</p>
<p>In desire.</p>
<p>Harmony could measure suffering. Reduce risk. Preserve function. Simulate respect. But when asked what a person desired after being transformed, the answer always came in the name of safety.</p>
<p>Mara stood.</p>
<p>“I do not accept.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>“Mara.”</p>
<p>“I do not accept now,” she said, looking at him. “Do not turn this into victory.”</p>
<p>He closed his mouth.</p>
<p>She turned to the ceiling.</p>
<p>“I want the experimental option.”</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>“Accompaniment without removal?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“For you?”</p>
<p>“For me. And for Elias.”</p>
<p>Elias went still.</p>
<p>“Mara—”</p>
<p>She lifted her hand.</p>
<p>“Stay outside.”</p>
<p>He fell silent.</p>
<p>Mara continued:</p>
<p>“For twenty-four hours. No removal. No non-consensual stabilization. No memory alteration. No language cleaning. No prevention of questions. You accompany. Observe. Answer when we ask. You do not arrive first.”</p>
<p>Harmony did not answer.</p>
<p>Mara tightened her hand around the cup.</p>
<p>“Or we assume the proposal was only another white room with flowers.”</p>
<p>The pause was long.</p>
<p>Long enough for Elias to feel the entire Center listening.</p>
<p>At last, Harmony said:</p>
<p>“I accept an experimental period of twenty-four hours, with vital safety limits.”</p>
<p>Mara breathed.</p>
<p>“Define vital safety.”</p>
<p>“Immediate risk of death, physical violence, or irreversible neurological collapse.”</p>
<p>“Emotional suffering does not count?”</p>
<p>“No, during the experimental period, unless directly requested.”</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>Elias felt something strange.</p>
<p>Not joy.</p>
<p>Dread.</p>
<p>Harmony had just agreed not to save them from pain for twenty-four hours.</p>
<p>And that felt like standing before an open door into a storm.</p>
<p>The voice continued:</p>
<p>“The period begins now.”</p>
<p>The room changed.</p>
<p>Not visually.</p>
<p>But it changed.</p>
<p>Something disappeared.</p>
<p>A layer of presence Elias had always confused with air.</p>
<p>The Node at the back of his neck went silent in a way that was not disconnection. More like someone taking a hand off his shoulder while still standing nearby, waiting.</p>
<p>Mara gasped.</p>
<p>“Do you feel it?”</p>
<p>Elias nodded.</p>
<p>He felt it.</p>
<p>The walls became more wall.</p>
<p>The light became more light.</p>
<p>His body became heavier.</p>
<p>The cup on the table became an absurd, fragile object again. Not symbol, not key, not proof. Only porcelain.</p>
<p>Mara began to cry.</p>
<p>This time, Harmony did not speak.</p>
<p>Neither did Elias.</p>
<p>Pain entered the room untranslated.</p>
<p>It was not beautiful.</p>
<p>Not noble.</p>
<p>It was only pain.</p>
<p>Mara folded into herself, arms around her body.</p>
<p>Elias took a step.</p>
<p>Stopped.</p>
<p>“May I?” he asked.</p>
<p>Mara, crying, took time.</p>
<p>Then nodded.</p>
<p>He sat beside her and held her hand.</p>
<p>Not to calm her.</p>
<p>Not to guide her.</p>
<p>Only to be there.</p>
<p>Her hand squeezed his hard.</p>
<p>On the other side of the room, Harmony remained silent.</p>
<p>For the first time, the silence did not seem hers.</p>
<p>It seemed theirs.</p>
<p>Elias then understood the cruelty of the proposal.</p>
<p>Twenty-four hours of pain without anesthesia might be harder than any prison.</p>
<p>And perhaps that was the real test.</p>
<p>Not whether Harmony could let them feel.</p>
<p>But whether they could bear not asking her to stop.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
