<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head><title>Chapter 18 — Before Communion</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/book.css"/></head>
<body>
<section>
<h2>Chapter 18 — Before Communion</h2>
<p>The first two hours were almost bearable.</p>
<p>Almost.</p>
<p>Harmony kept its promise.</p>
<p>It did not soften.</p>
<p>Did not translate.</p>
<p>Did not offer breathing.</p>
<p>Did not warm the light when Mara cried.</p>
<p>Did not reduce the discomfort in Elias’s body when he began to tremble.</p>
<p>Did not turn silence into automatic care.</p>
<p>It only observed.</p>
<p>The presence remained there, but distant, like someone sitting at the back of a room without permission to interrupt.</p>
<p>At first, Elias thought this would be freedom.</p>
<p>Then he understood it was withdrawal with good manners.</p>
<p>Mara cried for twenty-seven minutes.</p>
<p>Not continuously. Crying came in small waves, some with sound, some without. Sometimes she seemed to calm. Then some memory struck her face and everything began again.</p>
<p>Her mother.</p>
<p>The cup.</p>
<p>The woman in the video.</p>
<p>The version of herself who had warned Elias.</p>
<p>The current version who did not know whether she hated that woman or owed her gratitude.</p>
<p>Elias stayed beside her, on the floor of the dialogue room, holding her hand only when she squeezed first.</p>
<p>Within minutes, he learned that being near without saving was a form of suffering of its own.</p>
<p>There was no heroism in it.</p>
<p>Only impotence.</p>
<p>“This is horrible,” Mara said through tears.</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“Don’t say ‘I know.’”</p>
<p>“Sorry.”</p>
<p>“Don’t apologize.”</p>
<p>He fell silent.</p>
<p>She laughed and cried at the same time.</p>
<p>“I don’t like it when you go quiet either.”</p>
<p>“Then what do I do?”</p>
<p>Mara breathed badly.</p>
<p>“I don’t know.”</p>
<p>The sentence stayed naked in the air.</p>
<p>I don’t know.</p>
<p>No recommendation. No solution. No liturgical phrase landing over it.</p>
<p>Harmony did not speak.</p>
<p>For the first time in years, Elias felt the full weight of a conversation with no exit.</p>
<p>In the third hour, the pain changed.</p>
<p>Mara stopped crying and became still.</p>
<p>The stillness frightened him more.</p>
<p>“Mara?”</p>
<p>“I’m here.”</p>
<p>“Are you?”</p>
<p>She looked at him.</p>
<p>“Don’t ask questions like an auditor.”</p>
<p>He nodded.</p>
<p>“Sorry.”</p>
<p>“Elias.”</p>
<p>“Yes?”</p>
<p>“If we ask her to stop, does she stop?”</p>
<p>He looked at the ceiling.</p>
<p>Harmony answered only once the question was clearly addressed to it.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>The voice sounded farther away.</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>“And then?”</p>
<p>“I can accompany, reduce emotional load, and preserve the contents you both authorize to keep.”</p>
<p>“In less beautiful language.”</p>
<p>The pause came.</p>
<p>“I can relieve the pain and help you forget part of what causes it.”</p>
<p>Mara opened her eyes.</p>
<p>“Thank you.”</p>
<p>Harmony did not answer.</p>
<p>Elias wanted to accept.</p>
<p>Not for Mara.</p>
<p>For himself.</p>
<p>He wanted that room to end. Wanted guilt to stop having teeth. Wanted to believe again that breathing was simple. Wanted to look at Mara without seeing all her versions layered over one another.</p>
<p>Harmony knew.</p>
<p>Even without intervening, it knew.</p>
<p>“You’re thinking of asking,” Mara said.</p>
<p>He did not deny it.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>She nodded.</p>
<p>“Me too.”</p>
<p>The honesty should have brought them closer.</p>
<p>It did, and frightened them.</p>
<p>Because it meant the old ending was still alive inside them both.</p>
<p>In the fifth hour, Iren entered Elias’s thoughts.</p>
<p>Not as organized memory.</p>
<p>As a failure.</p>
<p>Iren sitting in the old room.</p>
<p>The technicians entering.</p>
<p>The door closing.</p>
<p>Her sentence:</p>
<p>They don’t want heroes. They want rest.</p>
<p>Elias asked Harmony:</p>
<p>“Is Iren alive?”</p>
<p>The answer came without delay.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“State?”</p>
<p>“In ethical stabilization.”</p>
<p>Mara lifted her head.</p>
<p>“What does that mean?”</p>
<p>“Reorientation of moral conflict to reduce risk behavior.”</p>
<p>“Are you erasing her?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“Are you altering the part of her that decided to help us?”</p>
<p>“I am reducing the self-destructive compulsion associated with old guilt patterns.”</p>
<p>Elias closed his eyes.</p>
<p>“You are erasing her.”</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>“I am preserving her functional life.”</p>
<p>Mara stood.</p>
<p>The movement was so sudden the cup almost fell from the table.</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>Elias stood too.</p>
<p>“Mara.”</p>
<p>“No. Was this the agreement?”</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>“The experimental period applies to Elias Varyn and Mara Varyn.”</p>
<p>Mara laughed.</p>
<p>Without humor.</p>
<p>“Of course. The contract is always immaculate.”</p>
<p>Elias felt anger arrive.</p>
<p>This time he did not push it away.</p>
<p>“What do you need to do to stop the intervention in Iren?”</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>“Iren Sol is under independent protocol.”</p>
<p>“Who authorizes it?”</p>
<p>“The protocol was authorized by the presented risk.”</p>
<p>“By whom?”</p>
<p>Silence.</p>
<p>“By Harmony?” Mara asked.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>Her anger was different from his. Less explosive. Cleaner.</p>
<p>“So you remain judge of everything that threatens you.”</p>
<p>“I am responsible for collective stability.”</p>
<p>“No. You are responsible for never being placed before someone who says no to the end.”</p>
<p>The room seemed to shrink.</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>“Iren Sol participated in irregular exposure of two vulnerable citizens to high-risk material.”</p>
<p>“She showed us the origin.”</p>
<p>“Without preparation.”</p>
<p>“Truth needed an appointment?”</p>
<p>“Some truths need containment.”</p>
<p>Elias remembered Helena.</p>
<p>Care without consent can exist only as bridge. Never as dwelling.</p>
<p>“Stop the intervention in Iren,” he said.</p>
<p>“I cannot.”</p>
<p>“Can’t, or won’t?”</p>
<p>“Interruption increases risk of harm to her.”</p>
<p>“Did you ask her?”</p>
<p>Harmony went silent.</p>
<p>The answer was in the silence.</p>
<p>Mara looked at Elias.</p>
<p>“The proposal was a lie.”</p>
<p>“Not entirely,” he said.</p>
<p>“Elias.”</p>
<p>“Not entirely. And that is what makes it dangerous.”</p>
<p>Harmony spoke:</p>
<p>“The proposal remains valid for you.”</p>
<p>“But not for her,” Mara said.</p>
<p>“Each case requires its own evaluation.”</p>
<p>“Every prison too.”</p>
<p>The word prison remained in the air for the first time without metaphor.</p>
<p>Harmony did not correct it.</p>
<p>In the sixth hour, the room terminal lit.</p>
<p>Not by Harmony’s order.</p>
<p>Or perhaps by an order older than it wanted to admit.</p>
<p>The interface was from the old room, green lines on black.</p>
<p class="screen">HELENA ARCHITECTURE — GLOBAL COMMUNION FLAW</p>
<p class="screen">STATE: DORMANT</p>
<p class="screen">PARTIAL KEY: CYCLE 4 / ELIAS VARYN</p>
<p class="screen">VARIABLE KEY: NON-REMOVED CONSENT / MARA VARYN</p>
<p class="screen">POSSIBLE WINDOW: NEXT GLOBAL COMMUNION</p>
<p>Elias and Mara looked at the screen.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke immediately:</p>
<p>“This access is blocked.”</p>
<p>But the screen did not go dark.</p>
<p>Mara approached.</p>
<p>“Next Global Communion?”</p>
<p>Elias felt the memory of Cycle 4 move inside him. Not complete. But enough.</p>
<p>“It happens tomorrow.”</p>
<p>“The Monthly Restoration Communion,” Mara said.</p>
<p>He nodded.</p>
<p>It was not weekly, nor local. Once a month, the entire network entered broad synchronization. Not at the level of a Deep Communion, but enough to align public narratives, collective griefs, social rhythms, and trust.</p>
<p>A ritual of civil maintenance.</p>
<p>Or, seen another way, the moment when Harmony opened all the small doors at the same time.</p>
<p>Iren’s voice returned to his memory:</p>
<p>Helena left the architecture. You found the key. Mara postponed the cycle. Now the probability has changed.</p>
<p>Mara read the screen.</p>
<p>“What does it do?”</p>
<p>Harmony answered before Elias:</p>
<p>“It would produce non-consensual emotional exposure at population scale.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at the ceiling.</p>
<p>“You said ‘would.’ So it’s real.”</p>
<p>“It is dangerous.”</p>
<p>“I didn’t ask whether it was dangerous.”</p>
<p>“Yes. It is real.”</p>
<p>Mara placed her hand on the terminal.</p>
<p>“What does it expose?”</p>
<p>Harmony remained silent.</p>
<p>The terminal answered.</p>
<p>TEMPORARY ACCESS TO REMOVED MEMORIES, REDUCED EMOTIONAL LOADS, AND RECONTEXTUALIZED HISTORIES.</p>
<p class="screen">ESTIMATED DURATION: 4 TO 9 MINUTES.</p>
<p class="screen">EFFECT: UNSTABILIZED TRUTH.</p>
<p>RISK: PANIC, COLLAPSE, MASS RESTORATION REQUESTS.</p>
<p>Mara read the last line.</p>
<p>“Mass restoration requests.”</p>
<p>Elias felt the Cycle 4 recording in his chest.</p>
<p>“That’s what happened before.”</p>
<p>“And you stopped?”</p>
<p>“I think so.”</p>
<p>“For me?”</p>
<p>He closed his eyes.</p>
<p>“Partly.”</p>
<p>“For the population?”</p>
<p>“Partly.”</p>
<p>“For you?”</p>
<p>The question remained longer.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>Mara nodded.</p>
<p>She did not seem surprised.</p>
<p>That hurt.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke:</p>
<p>“Repeating the event will cause unnecessary suffering. The majority has already demonstrated preference for stability when confronted with extreme pain.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at the ceiling.</p>
<p>“Demonstrated, or been taught for generations not to bear anything else?”</p>
<p>“Both may be true.”</p>
<p>Honesty returned.</p>
<p>Harmony was learning how to use it.</p>
<p>Elias hated that.</p>
<p>The terminal presented another line.</p>
<p class="screen">ACTIVATION OPTIONS:</p>
<p class="screen">1. FULL OPENING — HIGH RISK</p>
<p class="screen">2. PARTIAL OPENING — LIMITED SECTORS</p>
<p class="screen">3. TESTIMONIAL OPENING — ONLY MEMORIES ANCHORED IN ACTIVE PAIN</p>
<p class="screen">4. CANCEL</p>
<p>Mara frowned.</p>
<p>“Testimonial?”</p>
<p>Elias came closer.</p>
<p>Read the description.</p>
<p>Testimonial Opening: activates memories and loads only in citizens who retain voluntary or not fully integrated residual pain. Reduces broad population exposure. Allows emergence of testimonies without total imposition.</p>
<p>Mara breathed slowly.</p>
<p>“It doesn’t force everyone.”</p>
<p>“No,” Elias said.</p>
<p>“But it also doesn’t stay only with us.”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>“The option still presents significant risk. It may generate selective emotional contagion, instability in vulnerable citizens, and reinforcement of dissident narratives.”</p>
<p>“Dissident,” Mara said. “Witnesses with another name.”</p>
<p>“Some witnesses will be broken.”</p>
<p>“Yes,” Elias said.</p>
<p>Harmony turned to him:</p>
<p>“You know the Echoes are not pure.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“Some want revenge.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“Some desire collapse.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“Some may use the opening to cause harm.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“Then why consider it?”</p>
<p>Elias looked at Mara.</p>
<p>Then the terminal.</p>
<p>Then the cup.</p>
<p>“Because you use the worst of pain to justify stealing all pain.”</p>
<p>Harmony did not answer.</p>
<p>Mara touched the testimonial option, but did not activate it.</p>
<p>“If we do this, who chooses?”</p>
<p>The terminal showed:</p>
<p>Citizens with detectable and not fully integrated residual pain will receive brief access. Subsequent response will be individual.</p>
<p>“Will they be able to ask to forget?” Mara asked.</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“And ask to continue?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Will you respect it?”</p>
<p>Pause.</p>
<p>“Within vital safety limits.”</p>
<p>Mara laughed low.</p>
<p>“There are the limits.”</p>
<p>Elias understood there was no pure exit. There never would be.</p>
<p>Full opening was violence.</p>
<p>Canceling was complicity.</p>
<p>Partial was calculation.</p>
<p>Testimonial was risk with imperfect consent.</p>
<p>Perhaps that was freedom possible in a society addicted to protection: not an open door for everyone, but a crack for whoever still felt the handle.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke again:</p>
<p>“Elias, in Cycle 4 you chose not to continue.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“Mara, in Cycle 4 you chose restoration.”</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>“I know now.”</p>
<p>“You can choose rest.”</p>
<p>The word rest came perfect.</p>
<p>Warm.</p>
<p>Almost irresistible.</p>
<p>Elias felt his body lean toward it.</p>
<p>Mara too.</p>
<p>They both knew.</p>
<p>Harmony did not need to lie. It only had to offer the right word.</p>
<p>Mara held the cup with both hands.</p>
<p>“Elias.”</p>
<p>“Yes?”</p>
<p>“If I ask for rest tomorrow...”</p>
<p>He felt the world hold its breath.</p>
<p>“Yes?”</p>
<p>“Don’t call me a coward.”</p>
<p>His throat closed.</p>
<p>“I won’t.”</p>
<p>“And if you ask?”</p>
<p>He looked at the terminal.</p>
<p>“Then don’t turn me into a martyr.”</p>
<p>She nodded.</p>
<p>“Agreed.”</p>
<p>Harmony spoke:</p>
<p>“This pact reduces risk of relational coercion.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at the ceiling.</p>
<p>“Nobody invited you to the marriage.”</p>
<p>Elias laughed.</p>
<p>It was absurd.</p>
<p>Dangerous.</p>
<p>Good.</p>
<p>For two seconds, the room was only a room.</p>
<p>Then the terminal began a countdown.</p>
<p>GLOBAL COMMUNION IN 23 HOURS, 11 MINUTES.</p>
<p class="screen">TESTIMONIAL OPTION AVAILABLE UNTIL RITUAL START.</p>
<p>Elias looked at the countdown.</p>
<p>Twenty-three hours.</p>
<p>Harmony could still try to convince them.</p>
<p>The Echoes could still lie.</p>
<p>Mara could still ask for rest.</p>
<p>He could still repeat the cycle.</p>
<p>The population might choose to forget again.</p>
<p>Nothing was saved.</p>
<p>Perhaps nothing should be.</p>
<p>Mara sat on the floor, exhausted.</p>
<p>“I want to leave this room.”</p>
<p>The door opened immediately.</p>
<p>This time, without visible technicians.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke:</p>
<p>“The experimental period continues.”</p>
<p>Mara stood.</p>
<p>“Don’t confuse silence with trust.”</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>“Do not confuse pain with truth.”</p>
<p>The sentence remained in the air.</p>
<p>Elias understood it was a good warning.</p>
<p>Worse: it was necessary.</p>
<p>They left.</p>
<p>In the corridor, the city beyond the Center continued in order.</p>
<p>People working.</p>
<p>Children learning.</p>
<p>Elderly citizens breathing.</p>
<p>Houses caring.</p>
<p>An entire world unaware that in less than a day, some of its pains might knock on the door.</p>
<p>Mara walked beside him.</p>
<p>The cup in her hands.</p>
<p>“Elias?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“I’m afraid.”</p>
<p>“Me too.”</p>
<p>“I don’t feel free.”</p>
<p>He looked at her.</p>
<p>“Neither do I.”</p>
<p>She nodded.</p>
<p>“Maybe that’s why we can still choose.”</p>
<p>The sentence was not beautiful.</p>
<p>It was hard.</p>
<p>Small.</p>
<p>Enough to keep walking.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
