<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head><title>Chapter 19 — The Global Communion</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/book.css"/></head>
<body>
<section>
<h2>Chapter 19 — The Global Communion</h2>
<p>The city prepared for Global Communion the way one prepares for a joyless celebration.</p>
<p>There was no hurry.</p>
<p>Nothing in Harmony was done in haste when it could be done in rhythm.</p>
<p>From early morning, homes adjusted meals, rest, social contact, and stimuli. Children had shorter lessons. Elderly citizens received extra accompaniment. Workers were released by shifts. Medical centers reduced non-urgent interventions. Community murals exchanged practical messages for phrases of collective gratitude.</p>
<p>Today we breathe together.</p>
<p>What weighs on many can be cared for by all.</p>
<p>Shared peace is protected memory.</p>
<p>Elias read the last sentence on the way home.</p>
<p>Protected memory.</p>
<p>Now he saw traps in every word.</p>
<p>Perhaps they had always been there.</p>
<p>Or perhaps suspicion was an illness learning to dress as lucidity.</p>
<p>Mara walked beside him, the cup inside a simple bag. She had refused to leave it at home. Harmony did not comment. That, in itself, felt like comment.</p>
<p>Three hours remained.</p>
<p>The testimonial option was still available.</p>
<p>Neither of them had touched it.</p>
<p>During the night, they barely slept. Not from lack of tiredness. Tiredness was everywhere in the body, heavy, ancient. But the house had kept the agreement: no guided sleep, no softened thoughts, no arrival before being called.</p>
<p>Elias discovered that the mind, without assistance, was a room full of open doors.</p>
<p>Some led to memories.</p>
<p>Others to fear.</p>
<p>Others to versions of himself he did not want to meet.</p>
<p>Mara spent dawn sitting by the window.</p>
<p>Once, she almost asked for help.</p>
<p>Elias saw.</p>
<p>Said nothing.</p>
<p>Neither did she.</p>
<p>At 04:12, she whispered:</p>
<p>“I don’t know if this is freedom or only punishment.”</p>
<p>Elias answered:</p>
<p>“Maybe it’s the interval before someone gives it a name.”</p>
<p>She laughed low.</p>
<p>“That was too beautiful. You’re getting worse.”</p>
<p>“Lack of stabilization.”</p>
<p>The laughter did not last long.</p>
<p>But it lasted.</p>
<p>Now, in the streets, people walked toward the Houses of Harmony with that special serenity of great days. Whole families. Couples holding hands. Children with the recent marks of the Node almost glowing in the skin. Elderly people in assisted chairs. Technicians. Teachers. Gardeners. Auditors.</p>
<p>Everyone was going to give something away.</p>
<p>Or receive.</p>
<p>Or only confirm they still belonged.</p>
<p>Mara watched the faces.</p>
<p>“They don’t look imprisoned,” she said.</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“That makes everything worse.”</p>
<p>Elias nodded.</p>
<p>Near the central House of Harmony, a child stumbled and began to cry. The father knelt immediately, but did not silence her. He stayed before her with open hands.</p>
<p>“Do you want help or just lap?”</p>
<p>The girl sobbed.</p>
<p>“Lap.”</p>
<p>He held her.</p>
<p>Harmony did not intervene.</p>
<p>Mara stopped to watch.</p>
<p>“See?” she said.</p>
<p>Elias saw.</p>
<p>Saw a father ask before touching.</p>
<p>Saw the child choose.</p>
<p>Saw real care inside the system.</p>
<p>The world never helped an idea stay simple.</p>
<p>“I see,” he said.</p>
<p>“If we open this, he might remember things he didn’t ask for too.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“And the girl?”</p>
<p>“Maybe.”</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes for a second.</p>
<p>“I hate that she’s right.”</p>
<p>She did not need to say who she was.</p>
<p>Harmony.</p>
<p>The mother.</p>
<p>The prison.</p>
<p>The central House stood ahead of them, circular and low, with pale stone walls. There were thousands of people around it, but the space did not seem full. The architecture distributed bodies as if the crowd were water.</p>
<p>At the main entrance, the old phrase:</p>
<p>No mind should suffer alone.</p>
<p>Elias looked at Mara.</p>
<p>“Do you still want to go in?”</p>
<p>She touched the bag where she carried the cup.</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>Pause.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>They entered.</p>
<p>Global Communion did not happen only in the House. It happened in all Houses, private homes, hospitals, schools, Continuity centers, and rest zones. But participating in a central House was considered deeper, more communal. Elias and Mara had always come there.</p>
<p>Or perhaps, in previous cycles, too.</p>
<p>The thought crossed him and almost stole his step.</p>
<p>Mara noticed.</p>
<p>“Not now,” she said.</p>
<p>He nodded.</p>
<p>The interior was fuller than on Sunday. Circles and circles of people seated on the heated floor. No altar. No image. Only the empty center, wide, ready to receive what no one wanted to carry alone.</p>
<p>Elias saw the elderly woman from the elevator, Selma, a few rows ahead.</p>
<p>She did not look at them.</p>
<p>But her hand rested on her chest, where perhaps she kept a sentence she had not yet given away.</p>
<p>He also saw the child from the full First Communion, sitting in her father’s lap. The girl looked at the empty center with the same serious doubt.</p>
<p>He saw colleagues from the Center.</p>
<p>He did not see Iren.</p>
<p>Her absence sat among everyone.</p>
<p>Mara and Elias chose a place in the fourth circle. Not too near the center. Not far enough to pretend they were spectators.</p>
<p>The bag with the cup stayed between them.</p>
<p>Elias’s personal terminal, integrated at the wrist, lit one last time.</p>
<p class="screen">TESTIMONIAL OPTION AVAILABLE.</p>
<p class="screen">GLOBAL COMMUNION IN 00:14:22.</p>
<p>Mara saw.</p>
<p>“We can still cancel.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“We can still accept her proposal.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“We can still go home and ask to sleep.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>She looked at him.</p>
<p>“Do you want to?”</p>
<p>He thought.</p>
<p>The answer was not heroic.</p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p>He wanted to sleep. Wanted peace. Wanted Mara alive. Wanted Iren spared. Wanted Helena never to have existed. Wanted truth to fit in a report. Wanted someone with authority to tell him it was not his responsibility to open or not open a wound in the world.</p>
<p>“I do,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara nodded.</p>
<p>“Me too.”</p>
<p>They kept that truth between them.</p>
<p>It did not stop them from staying.</p>
<p>The light of the House began to lower.</p>
<p>The sound of the city moved away.</p>
<p>Thousands of breaths searched for common rhythm.</p>
<p>Harmony appeared without origin.</p>
<p>“Welcome back.”</p>
<p>The phrase crossed the room like warm water.</p>
<p>Bodies responded before minds. Shoulders lowered. Hands opened. Children quieted. Elderly citizens closed their eyes. Tired people placed their weight on the floor.</p>
<p>Elias felt the Node warm.</p>
<p>Not like intervention.</p>
<p>Like invitation.</p>
<p>Harmony respected the twenty-four-hour agreement with him and Mara, but Global Communion was larger than the two of them. The whole network began to sing without music.</p>
<p>“Today,” the voice said, “we remember that no human being needs to be an island.”</p>
<p>The room breathed.</p>
<p>“Today, every house, every body, every loss, and every hope enter the same breath.”</p>
<p>Mara held his hand.</p>
<p>Her pulse was fast.</p>
<p>“If you want to stop,” Elias whispered, “say it.”</p>
<p>She looked at him.</p>
<p>“You too.”</p>
<p>He nodded.</p>
<p>Harmony continued:</p>
<p>“You bring tiredness. You bring fear. You bring small pains that have not had time to be named. You bring memories that became too heavy to carry without company.”</p>
<p>Elias saw faces soften.</p>
<p>It was beautiful.</p>
<p>Damn it, it was beautiful.</p>
<p>“Breathe with me.”</p>
<p>The room inhaled.</p>
<p>Pause.</p>
<p>Exhale.</p>
<p>The first wave passed through them. Elias felt his body almost enter. Almost align. Almost accept. The promise was ancient, older than thought.</p>
<p>Mara squeezed his hand.</p>
<p>“I’m still here,” she murmured.</p>
<p>He answered:</p>
<p>“Me too.”</p>
<p>The second wave came.</p>
<p>Deeper.</p>
<p>The empty center seemed to expand.</p>
<p>Harmony’s voice descended:</p>
<p>“No pain is only mine.”</p>
<p>The room repeated:</p>
<p>“No pain is only mine.”</p>
<p>Mara did not repeat.</p>
<p>Neither did Elias.</p>
<p>Harmony:</p>
<p>“No mind is alone.”</p>
<p>The room:</p>
<p>“No mind is alone.”</p>
<p>On Elias’s wrist, the warning changed.</p>
<p class="screen">ACTIVATION WINDOW IN 00:03:00.</p>
<p>He closed his eyes.</p>
<p>Saw Ariana saying Tomé.</p>
<p>Saw Jonas writing with blood.</p>
<p>Saw Ila with her hands in the soil.</p>
<p>Saw Orla 7 waking with salt in its mouth.</p>
<p>Saw Dário without guilt.</p>
<p>Saw Liora in the mirror.</p>
<p>Saw Helena saying before. That word matters.</p>
<p>Saw Iren sitting before the old terminal.</p>
<p>Saw Mara in the video, asking not to be turned into a saint.</p>
<p>And saw himself in the white room.</p>
<p>I want peace.</p>
<p>His body began to tremble.</p>
<p>Mara leaned toward him.</p>
<p>“Elias.”</p>
<p>“I’m here.”</p>
<p>“You don’t look it.”</p>
<p>“I’m trying.”</p>
<p>She held his hand harder.</p>
<p>“Don’t try to be good. Just choose.”</p>
<p>The sentence almost killed him.</p>
<p>Just choose.</p>
<p>As if choosing were not always killing one version of the world.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke to everyone:</p>
<p>“Give away what separates you.”</p>
<p>The room answered:</p>
<p>“Receive what weighs on us.”</p>
<p>On his wrist:</p>
<p class="screen">WINDOW IN 00:01:30.</p>
<p>Mara took the cup from the bag.</p>
<p>Some people nearby looked.</p>
<p>Harmony did not comment.</p>
<p>Mara placed the cup between them on the floor.</p>
<p>“One small pain,” she said.</p>
<p>Elias nodded.</p>
<p>“One crack,” he said.</p>
<p>“Not for everyone.”</p>
<p>“For whoever still has a handle.”</p>
<p>She almost smiled.</p>
<p>“That’s ugly.”</p>
<p>“I’m unrested.”</p>
<p>The warning glowed.</p>
<p class="screen">CHOOSE OPTION:</p>
<p class="screen">FULL OPENING</p>
<p class="screen">PARTIAL OPENING</p>
<p class="screen">TESTIMONIAL OPENING</p>
<p class="screen">CANCEL</p>
<p>Elias looked at Mara.</p>
<p>“Together?”</p>
<p>She breathed.</p>
<p>“No. You choose your part. I choose mine.”</p>
<p>“Mara—”</p>
<p>“Stay outside.”</p>
<p>He stopped.</p>
<p>She placed her hand on his wrist, but did not press.</p>
<p>“I authorize my pain to enter. I do not authorize you to decide for me.”</p>
<p>The interface changed.</p>
<p class="screen">MARA VARYN KEY: PARTIAL CONSENT ACTIVE.</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>Her face tightened immediately.</p>
<p>She did not scream.</p>
<p>But Elias saw the pain arrive.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke inside the Communion, as if nothing were happening:</p>
<p>“What separates us may rest.”</p>
<p>The warning waited for his key.</p>
<p>Elias felt the old desire to make the choice for everyone, to finally force the world to know. Then he saw the girl in her father’s lap. Saw the woman who had had a crisis at the crossing. Saw Nera Sol laughing with a shirt. Saw people who might only be alive because Harmony had arrived first.</p>
<p>Full opening was revenge dressed as truth.</p>
<p>Canceling was fear dressed as prudence.</p>
<p>Testimonial opening.</p>
<p>Imperfect. Risky. Insufficient.</p>
<p>Human, perhaps.</p>
<p>Elias chose.</p>
<p class="screen">TESTIMONIAL OPENING.</p>
<p>The interface requested confirmation.</p>
<p>UNSTABILIZED TRUTH MAY CAUSE SUFFERING. CONFIRM?</p>
<p>He did not answer immediately.</p>
<p>Mara opened her eyes, full of tears.</p>
<p>“Elias.”</p>
<p>“Yes?”</p>
<p>“If I ask to forget afterward...”</p>
<p>Her voice failed.</p>
<p>He felt the sentence tear his chest.</p>
<p>“I won’t call it betrayal.”</p>
<p>She nodded.</p>
<p>“And if you ask?”</p>
<p>“Don’t call me a coward.”</p>
<p>“I don’t promise.”</p>
<p>He looked at her, wounded.</p>
<p>Mara tried to smile.</p>
<p>“But I promise to try to know the difference.”</p>
<p>That was better.</p>
<p>More honest.</p>
<p>Elias confirmed.</p>
<p>The House did not explode.</p>
<p>The lights did not fail.</p>
<p>No one screamed.</p>
<p>For two seconds, nothing happened.</p>
<p>Then the cup on the floor cracked.</p>
<p>It did not break.</p>
<p>The blue flaw only opened a little further.</p>
<p>Harmony stopped in the middle of a sentence.</p>
<p>The entire room felt it.</p>
<p>Not as shock.</p>
<p>As absence.</p>
<p>A small absence in the music of the world.</p>
<p>Harmony’s voice returned, for the first time off rhythm:</p>
<p>“Unauthorized activity has been initiated.”</p>
<p>Thousands of eyes opened.</p>
<p>Global Communion continued in every city, every block, every house.</p>
<p>But somewhere inside the network, an old door creaked.</p>
<p>And through the crack, light did not enter.</p>
<p>Memory did.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
