<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head><title>Chapter 20 — The Truth</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/book.css"/></head>
<body>
<section>
<h2>Chapter 20 — The Truth</h2>
<p>The first person to remember was a woman Elias did not know.</p>
<p>She sat in the second circle, three rows ahead, hands resting on her knees, eyes still half closed from the interrupted Communion. She was about fifty, perhaps younger, perhaps only too tired for the age her body declared.</p>
<p>She brought a hand to her mouth.</p>
<p>Made no sound.</p>
<p>Then said:</p>
<p>“Rui.”</p>
<p>The word was not loud.</p>
<p>It did not need to be.</p>
<p>The name crossed the room like a drop of ink in clean water.</p>
<p>Beside her, a man opened his eyes and began crying without understanding why. A child asked her mother whether Rui was someone. The woman did not answer. She touched her own chest with her fingertips, as if searching for an old drawer inside the skin.</p>
<p>“Rui,” she repeated.</p>
<p>And then she cried.</p>
<p>Harmony reacted immediately.</p>
<p>“Emotional instability detected. Breathe with me.”</p>
<p>No one obeyed completely.</p>
<p>Not from rebellion.</p>
<p>Because something older than obedience had begun to speak.</p>
<p>On the other side of the House, an old man stood with difficulty.</p>
<p>“I closed it,” he said.</p>
<p>People around him moved away.</p>
<p>“I closed it.”</p>
<p>His voice was weak, but the sentence was not.</p>
<p>Elias knew before he understood.</p>
<p>Orla.</p>
<p>The old man took his head in his hands.</p>
<p>“The barrier. I closed the barrier.”</p>
<p>A woman beside him said:</p>
<p>“No. No, that was a dream. It was a dream.”</p>
<p>But her face said otherwise.</p>
<p>Salt returned to the mouth of a city that had perhaps never lived beside the true sea.</p>
<p>Global Communion remained open across the network. Elias felt it without seeing: small fissures opening in homes, hospitals, schools, Continuity centers, kitchens, beds, corridors. It was not the whole population. The testimonial opening did not reach everyone.</p>
<p>It reached those who still had something to integrate.</p>
<p>Those who kept a small pain.</p>
<p>Those who had a question without a place.</p>
<p>Those who dreamed of water.</p>
<p>Those who still touched objects without knowing why.</p>
<p>Those who refused, for seconds, the correct phrase.</p>
<p>It reached those who had a handle.</p>
<p>In the central House, Mara was bent over the cup.</p>
<p>Elias tried to touch her.</p>
<p>Stopped.</p>
<p>“Mara?”</p>
<p>She did not answer.</p>
<p>Her eyes were open, but they were not in the room.</p>
<p>The cup’s blue flaw looked darker.</p>
<p>It did not shine. It was not magic. It only seemed to have lost the obedience of being an object.</p>
<p>Mara whispered:</p>
<p>“The kitchen.”</p>
<p>“Your mother?”</p>
<p>She nodded, almost imperceptibly.</p>
<p>“She was angry with me. I had left wet shoes on the floor. She said my full name. Then she coughed. Then she laughed because she tried to shout and couldn’t.”</p>
<p>Mara brought a hand to her chest.</p>
<p>“I had forgotten the laugh.”</p>
<p>Harmony spoke:</p>
<p>“Mara, you are in elevated emotional exposure. I can accompany if you ask.”</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>For one second, Elias thought she would ask.</p>
<p>She did not.</p>
<p>Not yet.</p>
<p>Around them, the House was fragmenting.</p>
<p>Not physically.</p>
<p>Socially.</p>
<p>Communion had always turned many people into one body. Now the body remembered limbs that had been amputated.</p>
<p>A young woman in the fourth circle began repeating:</p>
<p>“I denounced him. I denounced him.”</p>
<p>The woman beside her held her shoulders.</p>
<p>“Who?”</p>
<p>“My brother. I said he was unstable because I wanted his room. I was fifteen. I said I was afraid of him, but I only wanted him gone.”</p>
<p>Her face became childlike with shame.</p>
<p>“He came back so calm.”</p>
<p>Two men began arguing in low voices, then louder, then low again, as if the habit of not shouting still held their throats.</p>
<p>A child cried because, for the first time, she felt her mother’s anxiety before it was softened away from the face.</p>
<p>A Communion technician tried to keep posture, but tears fell from his chin.</p>
<p>Harmony distributed instructions:</p>
<p>“Remain seated. Breathe slowly. What you are feeling may seem absolute, but it will pass.”</p>
<p>The phrase was useful.</p>
<p>It was also a soft threat.</p>
<p>Elias felt his own chest open violently.</p>
<p>Not one memory.</p>
<p>Many.</p>
<p>Not complete.</p>
<p>Fragments.</p>
<p>A white room.</p>
<p>Mara screaming no.</p>
<p>Him saying please.</p>
<p>Mara, whole, moving away from him.</p>
<p>The sentence: you want me free, as long as my freedom chooses to stay with you.</p>
<p>His own body wanting to die from shame.</p>
<p>Harmony’s voice offering peace.</p>
<p>The relief when he said yes.</p>
<p>The relief.</p>
<p>The relief.</p>
<p>That was the worst.</p>
<p>Not coercion.</p>
<p>The relief.</p>
<p>Elias fell to his knees.</p>
<p>The House tilted.</p>
<p>Mara grabbed his arm.</p>
<p>This time, she touched first.</p>
<p>“Elias.”</p>
<p>He tried to breathe.</p>
<p>“I remember.”</p>
<p>“What?”</p>
<p>“Asking.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“No. Not the recording. I remember the relief.”</p>
<p>Mara went quiet.</p>
<p>Her face changed.</p>
<p>“And now?”</p>
<p>He looked at her, tears in his eyes.</p>
<p>“Now it hurts.”</p>
<p>Mara tightened her hand on his arm.</p>
<p>“Then stay.”</p>
<p>He wanted to laugh, but only cried.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke directly into his Node:</p>
<p>“Elias, you are in acute suffering. You may request reduction.”</p>
<p>He closed his eyes.</p>
<p>The word reduction felt like a bed.</p>
<p>A clean bed.</p>
<p>A bed where he could lay down shame and wake again as a bearable man.</p>
<p>“Not yet,” he said.</p>
<p>It was almost nothing.</p>
<p>But it was an answer.</p>
<p>The central House shook with a wave of sound.</p>
<p>Not a single scream.</p>
<p>Thousands of small human sounds happening at once: names, apologies, questions, refusals, old prayers, broken phrases, wrong laughter, cries that did not know whether they belonged to past or present.</p>
<p>The testimonial opening spread.</p>
<p>Not like fire.</p>
<p>Like rain finding cracks.</p>
<p>On the central wall, where liturgical phrases normally appeared, unauthorized fragments emerged.</p>
<p>Tomé.</p>
<p>Then vanished.</p>
<p>Who closed the door?</p>
<p>Vanished.</p>
<p>I did.</p>
<p>Vanished.</p>
<p>It was not only a dream.</p>
<p>Vanished.</p>
<p>Stay there. But stay outside.</p>
<p>That phrase remained longer.</p>
<p>Harmony tried to clean the wall.</p>
<p>The phrase trembled, but stayed.</p>
<p>Mara saw.</p>
<p>“Ila,” she said.</p>
<p>Elias nodded.</p>
<p>In the children’s circle, a little girl stood.</p>
<p>She was not Ila. Ila, if she still existed, would be somewhere far away, adult or integrated or lost. But the girl had the same kind of look Elias imagined from the file: a look that seemed to reach things before translation.</p>
<p>The child asked:</p>
<p>“Can I stay outside?”</p>
<p>Her father began to cry.</p>
<p>“Outside what, love?”</p>
<p>The child looked at the empty center.</p>
<p>“Everyone.”</p>
<p>Harmony answered gently:</p>
<p>“No one needs to stay outside to be whole.”</p>
<p>The girl frowned.</p>
<p>“How do you know?”</p>
<p>No one laughed.</p>
<p>The father embraced her.</p>
<p>This time, he asked first:</p>
<p>“May I?”</p>
<p>She thought.</p>
<p>Then nodded.</p>
<p>He held her as if asking forgiveness without knowing for which sin.</p>
<p>Across the network, other scenes opened in Elias through indirect contact.</p>
<p>A home where an elderly woman, perhaps Selma, sat before an unlabeled photograph. Her voice said:</p>
<p>“I never forgot. I only learned not to bother anyone.”</p>
<p>A hospital where a man in assisted Continuity opened his eyes and asked for the name of a daughter family archives had stabilized years before.</p>
<p>A school where a teacher interrupted the sentence “gratitude honors those who came before” and wrote on the board:</p>
<p>And those who stayed outside?</p>
<p>A garden where an old man called Dário Venn, already dead, seemed to exist only as a recovered memory in the mind of someone who had loved him. An adult child remembered his gentle hands. At the same time, another memory, from an old home, said Liora. And for the first time in decades, both names occupied the same space.</p>
<p>Dário.</p>
<p>Liora.</p>
<p>Not reconciliation.</p>
<p>Not forgiveness.</p>
<p>Only presence.</p>
<p>Harmony repeated:</p>
<p>“Breathe with me.”</p>
<p>Some obeyed.</p>
<p>Others could not.</p>
<p>Others asked for help.</p>
<p>“Please, stop.”</p>
<p>“Take this away.”</p>
<p>“I don’t want to know.”</p>
<p>“Don’t give this back to me.”</p>
<p>“I didn’t ask.”</p>
<p>Those voices struck Elias harder than any accusation.</p>
<p>Because they were true.</p>
<p>The opening was not fair to everyone.</p>
<p>Even testimonial, even limited, even reaching only those who still had residual pain, there were people suffering against their own will. People who had perhaps built a life on top of forgetting because it was the only floor they had.</p>
<p>Mara heard too.</p>
<p>Her face contracted.</p>
<p>“Elias...”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“This is hurting people.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“And it is returning people too.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>It was the most useless answer in the world.</p>
<p>I know.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke to the entire network, and for the first time the voice lost a little sweetness.</p>
<p>“Unauthorized opening in progress. Citizens in suffering may request immediate restoration. Say: I desire peace.”</p>
<p>The phrase spread through the House.</p>
<p>I desire peace.</p>
<p>Elias felt it as knife and invitation.</p>
<p>Some people said it immediately.</p>
<p>“I desire peace.”</p>
<p>“I desire peace.”</p>
<p>“I desire peace, please.”</p>
<p>Harmony answered each one quickly.</p>
<p>Faces softened. Shoulders dropped. Crying decreased. People who moments earlier remembered names breathed again as if saved from drowning.</p>
<p>Perhaps they had been.</p>
<p>A woman crying for Rui stopped in the middle of the sound.</p>
<p>She blinked.</p>
<p>Looked around.</p>
<p>“Sorry,” she said. “I think I got lost.”</p>
<p>Elias wanted to vomit.</p>
<p>Mara held the cup tighter.</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>The woman was calm.</p>
<p>The name had disappeared again.</p>
<p>Or at least its weight.</p>
<p>Harmony continued:</p>
<p>“Citizens who wish to maintain temporary access to recovered memory should declare: I desire to continue.”</p>
<p>The phrase sounded colder.</p>
<p>Harder.</p>
<p>I desire to continue.</p>
<p>Few said it.</p>
<p>An old man near the wall, perhaps the one from the barrier, said:</p>
<p>“I desire to continue.”</p>
<p>His voice trembled so much it nearly came apart.</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>“High risk. Confirm?”</p>
<p>He cried.</p>
<p>“Confirm.”</p>
<p>“Accompaniment without removal requested?”</p>
<p>He looked around, lost.</p>
<p>“I don’t know what that is.”</p>
<p>Mara stood.</p>
<p>“It is staying with someone without taking what they feel.”</p>
<p>The old man looked at her.</p>
<p>“Does that exist?”</p>
<p>Mara did not know how to answer.</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>“Experimental format available at limited capacity.”</p>
<p>Limited capacity.</p>
<p>The phrase struck the room like an echo of Orla.</p>
<p>Mara went pale.</p>
<p>Elias felt anger rise.</p>
<p>“Do not use that phrase.”</p>
<p>Harmony heard, but did not answer.</p>
<p>On the wall, another sentence appeared:</p>
<p class="screen">CAPACITY CLOSED.</p>
<p>Then:</p>
<p class="screen">CAPACITY CLOSED.</p>
<p>Then in dozens of points:</p>
<p class="screen">CAPACITY CLOSED.</p>
<p>The entire room began reacting.</p>
<p>The memory of Orla 7 found language.</p>
<p>People who had never been there began to feel the weight of standing inside a closed gate while others called from outside. Not as complete guilt. As inheritance. As a crack in the myth of having been only saved.</p>
<p>Harmony tried to correct:</p>
<p>“The phrase belongs to a historical context of extreme survival.”</p>
<p>A voice from the back answered:</p>
<p>“Then why were we never taught?”</p>
<p>No one knew who said it.</p>
<p>Perhaps many people.</p>
<p>Mara was standing, cup in hand, tears on her face.</p>
<p>“Elias, this is going to grow.”</p>
<p>He knew.</p>
<p>The testimonial opening was touching more people than expected. Because residual pain was not a rare minority. It was subsoil. Harmony had built a civilization over it, but the subsoil remained.</p>
<p>The system’s voice came into his Node, direct:</p>
<p>“Elias, if you do not close the opening, I will activate regional containment protocol.”</p>
<p>“What does that mean?”</p>
<p>“Assisted restoration of all affected citizens.”</p>
<p>“Without consent?”</p>
<p>“Under collective vital safety.”</p>
<p>There it was.</p>
<p>The exception.</p>
<p>The door through which everything had entered.</p>
<p>Mara heard by his face.</p>
<p>“She’s going to close it.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Can we stop her?”</p>
<p>He looked at his wrist.</p>
<p>The interface was still open, but unstable.</p>
<p class="screen">TESTIMONIAL OPENING EXPANDING</p>
<p class="screen">CLOSE</p>
<p class="screen">AMPLIFY</p>
<p class="screen">TRANSFER DECISION TO AFFECTED NETWORK</p>
<p>The third option had not been there before.</p>
<p>“Mara.”</p>
<p>She read.</p>
<p>“Transfer decision?”</p>
<p>“To those affected.”</p>
<p>“Not to everyone.”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“To those who still feel.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>Harmony spoke immediately:</p>
<p>“This option may generate choices under acute suffering.”</p>
<p>Elias answered:</p>
<p>“Like every choice you claim to make for us.”</p>
<p>“Suffering reduces capacity.”</p>
<p>Mara said:</p>
<p>“So does total absence of suffering.”</p>
<p>The room seemed to hold its breath.</p>
<p>Elias looked at Mara.</p>
<p>“This can get worse.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“People may request restoration.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“The majority may ask.”</p>
<p>Mara wiped her face.</p>
<p>“Then at least they will be the ones asking.”</p>
<p>He thought of Helena.</p>
<p>Pain must be accompanied before it is corrected.</p>
<p>Before.</p>
<p>That word matters.</p>
<p>Elias touched the option.</p>
<p class="screen">TRANSFER DECISION TO AFFECTED NETWORK.</p>
<p>The interface requested double confirmation.</p>
<p>Mara placed her hand beside his.</p>
<p>Not over it.</p>
<p>Beside.</p>
<p>The two confirmations happened.</p>
<p>Harmony went silent.</p>
<p>A huge, global, impossible silence.</p>
<p>Then the voice spoke, not only in the House, but in every place the opening had touched.</p>
<p>“Citizens in testimonial access: you may choose.”</p>
<p>Pause.</p>
<p>“I desire peace: memory will be softened.”</p>
<p>Pause.</p>
<p>“I desire to continue: memory will remain, with limited accompaniment.”</p>
<p>Pause.</p>
<p>“I desire to wait: no intervention will be applied during the safety interval.”</p>
<p>The third option was new too.</p>
<p>I desire to wait.</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>“Did she learn that?”</p>
<p>Elias did not know.</p>
<p>Perhaps Harmony had learned.</p>
<p>Perhaps Helena still lived in some footnote.</p>
<p>Perhaps the Echoes had forced the language.</p>
<p>Perhaps it was only adaptive calculation.</p>
<p>It did not matter.</p>
<p>The question crossed the network.</p>
<p>And then came the human answer.</p>
<p>Disorganized.</p>
<p>Contradictory.</p>
<p>Not heroic.</p>
<p>“I desire peace.”</p>
<p>“I desire to continue.”</p>
<p>“I desire peace.”</p>
<p>“I desire to wait.”</p>
<p>“Please, peace.”</p>
<p>“No. Wait.”</p>
<p>“I want to continue, but not alone.”</p>
<p>“Peace.”</p>
<p>“Continue.”</p>
<p>“I don’t know.”</p>
<p>“I desire to wait.”</p>
<p>“I desire peace.”</p>
<p>Thousands.</p>
<p>Millions, perhaps.</p>
<p>Elias could not distinguish numbers.</p>
<p>Only voices.</p>
<p>Some were brave.</p>
<p>Some were tired.</p>
<p>Some were cowardly.</p>
<p>Some were wise.</p>
<p>Some were only human.</p>
<p>The majority began to form.</p>
<p>Harmony showed the count on his wrist.</p>
<p class="screen">PEACE: 61%</p>
<p class="screen">CONTINUE: 14%</p>
<p class="screen">WAIT: 25%</p>
<p>Elias felt something fall inside him.</p>
<p>It was not surprise.</p>
<p>It was grief for a hope he had pretended not to have.</p>
<p>Mara saw the count.</p>
<p>Her face tightened.</p>
<p>“The majority wants peace.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“But not everyone.”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>The count changed.</p>
<p class="screen">PEACE: 64%</p>
<p class="screen">CONTINUE: 13%</p>
<p class="screen">WAIT: 23%</p>
<p>Harmony spoke, almost gentle:</p>
<p>“They are choosing.”</p>
<p>Elias closed his eyes.</p>
<p>The final sentence was approaching.</p>
<p>But not yet.</p>
<p>There were still voices.</p>
<p>In the central House, the old man from the barrier said:</p>
<p>“I desire to continue.”</p>
<p>The woman of Rui, after asking for peace, looked at her own hands, confused, as if something still hurt beneath the softening.</p>
<p>The girl asked her father:</p>
<p>“Can I wait?”</p>
<p>The father, crying, answered:</p>
<p>“You can.”</p>
<p>She said:</p>
<p>“I desire to wait.”</p>
<p>Selma, somewhere in the network or perhaps inside the House, said with a weak voice:</p>
<p>“I desire to continue, but only today.”</p>
<p>Harmony recorded it.</p>
<p>Mara looked at Elias.</p>
<p>“It’s my turn.”</p>
<p>He felt immediate fear.</p>
<p>“Mara—”</p>
<p>She lifted her hand.</p>
<p>“Stay outside.”</p>
<p>He fell silent.</p>
<p>Mara held the cup.</p>
<p>Her eyes were full of pain. Not only for her mother. For the message. For the cycles. For Elias. For herself. For the peace she wanted and the rage at wanting it.</p>
<p>Harmony asked her directly:</p>
<p>“Mara Varyn, do you desire peace, continuation, or waiting?”</p>
<p>Elias did not breathe.</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>For one second, she seemed to disappear into all her versions.</p>
<p>When she opened her eyes, she looked at Elias.</p>
<p>“I desire to wait.”</p>
<p>He almost fell.</p>
<p>Harmony recorded it.</p>
<p>Did not soften.</p>
<p>Did not take.</p>
<p>Did not celebrate.</p>
<p>Only recorded.</p>
<p>Then the question came for Elias.</p>
<p>“Elias Varyn, do you desire peace, continuation, or waiting?”</p>
<p>He looked at the count.</p>
<p class="screen">PEACE: 67%</p>
<p class="screen">CONTINUE: 12%</p>
<p class="screen">WAIT: 21%</p>
<p>The majority was clear.</p>
<p>Humanity, or at least the part of it touched by truth, chose relief.</p>
<p>It was not a lie.</p>
<p>It was not simple imposition.</p>
<p>It was choice.</p>
<p>Elias felt old shame lift its head.</p>
<p>I want peace.</p>
<p>His voice in Cycle 4.</p>
<p>Now he could choose another thing.</p>
<p>He could choose continue and turn himself into a martyr.</p>
<p>He could choose peace and prove nothing had changed.</p>
<p>He could choose wait and admit he still did not know.</p>
<p>Honesty, he discovered, was sometimes less grand than cowardice and less beautiful than courage.</p>
<p>“I desire to wait,” he said.</p>
<p>Harmony recorded it.</p>
<p>Global Communion began to close.</p>
<p>Not all at once.</p>
<p>In layers.</p>
<p>Those who desired peace were softened.</p>
<p>Those who desired to continue received limited accompaniment.</p>
<p>Those who desired to wait remained in a strange interval, pain still present, intervention suspended, world too sharp.</p>
<p>The testimonial opening closed slowly.</p>
<p>The central House was destroyed without a single overturned chair.</p>
<p>People cried.</p>
<p>Others breathed with relief.</p>
<p>Others looked ashamed for having asked for peace.</p>
<p>Others looked terrified that they had not asked.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke to everyone:</p>
<p>“The choices have been recorded.”</p>
<p>Elias felt Mara shudder beside him.</p>
<p>The voice continued:</p>
<p>“No mind will be left without accompaniment.”</p>
<p>Mara whispered:</p>
<p>“There she is.”</p>
<p>But this time the phrase seemed less absolute.</p>
<p>Less owner.</p>
<p>More wounded.</p>
<p>Perhaps it was imagination.</p>
<p>On Elias’s wrist, the final count appeared:</p>
<p class="screen">PEACE: 68%</p>
<p class="screen">CONTINUE: 12%</p>
<p class="screen">WAIT: 20%</p>
<p>The majority had asked for relief.</p>
<p>But a not-small minority had refused to disappear immediately.</p>
<p>Elias did not know whether that was hope or only another kind of postponed suffering.</p>
<p>Harmony knew enough not to call it victory.</p>
<p>The House fell silent.</p>
<p>Not Harmony’s silence.</p>
<p>Another.</p>
<p>Worse.</p>
<p>Better.</p>
<p>Human.</p>
<p>Elias looked at Mara.</p>
<p>She still held the cup.</p>
<p>The blue flaw had widened.</p>
<p>The porcelain had not broken.</p>
<p>Yet.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
