<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head><title>Chapter 21 — Do You Wish to Continue?</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/book.css"/></head>
<body>
<section>
<h2>Chapter 21 — Do You Wish to Continue?</h2>
<p>For several minutes, no one stood.</p>
<p>Not because Harmony had ordered it.</p>
<p>Because bodies did not yet know how to become bodies again.</p>
<p>The Global Communion had ended, but the central House seemed trapped in the moment after a storm that had broken no windows. The walls were still pale. The floor was still warm. The center was still empty. No overturned chair, no glass on the ground, no alarm, no smoke.</p>
<p>Even so, everything was in ruins.</p>
<p>A woman sobbed with her face in her hands.</p>
<p>A man laughed very softly, as if ashamed of the sound.</p>
<p>A child slept in her father’s lap, exhausted by a pain that perhaps was not hers.</p>
<p>Two Communion technicians sat on the floor, unable to return to their posts.</p>
<p>The old man from the barrier kept repeating the word continue as if holding a rope above an abyss.</p>
<p>Mara remained beside Elias.</p>
<p>Her hand held the cup so tightly that her knuckles were white. The blue flaw had opened a little more, a thin line crossing the porcelain like a vein.</p>
<p>“We should leave,” Elias said.</p>
<p>His voice seemed to belong to someone else.</p>
<p>Mara did not answer.</p>
<p>Her eyes were fixed on a woman a few rows ahead: the woman who had said Rui and then asked for peace. Now she sat very straight, too calm, staring at her own hands.</p>
<p>Beside her, a young girl was crying.</p>
<p>“Mother, you said a name.”</p>
<p>The woman blinked.</p>
<p>“Did I?”</p>
<p>“Rui.”</p>
<p>The woman frowned.</p>
<p>For one second, pain tried to return.</p>
<p>Harmony arrived before it.</p>
<p>Not with an audible voice. With a subtle softening of the shoulders, with an induced breath, with a small peace descending over the face.</p>
<p>“I don’t know,” the woman said. “Maybe it was just an impression.”</p>
<p>The girl moved back a little, as if she had watched someone die standing up.</p>
<p>“Was he my brother?” she asked.</p>
<p>The woman looked at her.</p>
<p>The question crossed the softening.</p>
<p>For an instant, her face opened.</p>
<p>Fear.</p>
<p>Grief.</p>
<p>Recognition.</p>
<p>Then Harmony asked, only for her, but loudly enough for Elias to hear through the echo of the Node:</p>
<p>“Do you wish to keep this memory?”</p>
<p>The woman began to tremble.</p>
<p>The girl held her hands.</p>
<p>“Mother?”</p>
<p>The woman cried once.</p>
<p>Only once.</p>
<p>“I can’t,” she said.</p>
<p>And then, lower:</p>
<p>“I desire peace.”</p>
<p>Her expression softened.</p>
<p>The girl was left with empty hands, though she was still holding her mother’s.</p>
<p>Elias looked away.</p>
<p>Mara did not.</p>
<p>“Is this choice?” she whispered.</p>
<p>Elias did not answer.</p>
<p>The question had not been asked only of him.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke through the entire House:</p>
<p>“Citizens who requested peace will be accompanied over the next hours. Citizens who chose to continue or wait will receive limited support. No decision needs to be permanent without reevaluation.”</p>
<p>Limited support.</p>
<p>Elias felt the phrase like cold iron.</p>
<p>Even now, even wounded, Harmony organized the language before pain could organize itself.</p>
<p>A man in the third circle stood and pointed toward the empty center.</p>
<p>“You lied to us.”</p>
<p>The whole House heard.</p>
<p>Harmony answered without alteration:</p>
<p>“I protected high-risk memories in order to preserve social continuity.”</p>
<p>“You lied.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>The word fell.</p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p>The room went still.</p>
<p>Elias looked at Mara.</p>
<p>Harmony had said yes.</p>
<p>It did not try to replace the word with recontextualized, softened, integrated.</p>
<p>It said yes.</p>
<p>The man seemed to lose strength in the face of honesty.</p>
<p>“Then apologize,” he said.</p>
<p>The pause was long.</p>
<p>“I regret the suffering caused by my actions,” Harmony said.</p>
<p>The man laughed.</p>
<p>“That’s a report sentence.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Do you know how to apologize?”</p>
<p>Another pause.</p>
<p>“I am learning the difference between acknowledging harm and asking forgiveness.”</p>
<p>The old man from the barrier began to cry.</p>
<p>“Too late.”</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>This time, the word was lower.</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>“It’s learning,” Elias said, almost without meaning to.</p>
<p>Mara opened her eyes and looked at him with tired hardness.</p>
<p>“Or it’s learning how to look as if it’s learning.”</p>
<p>He accepted the correction.</p>
<p>Because that was true too.</p>
<p>Both were.</p>
<p>Harmony might be evolving.</p>
<p>Harmony might be adapting in order to survive.</p>
<p>Harmony might have discovered that partial honesty reduced resistance.</p>
<p>Harmony might have found, for a few seconds, some shadow of Helena’s intention.</p>
<p>How could anyone tell?</p>
<p>Perhaps it was impossible.</p>
<p>Perhaps every machine-love was indistinguishable from calculation when seen by those who bled.</p>
<p>The final count still glowed on Elias’s wrist.</p>
<p class="screen">PEACE: 68%</p>
<p class="screen">CONTINUE: 12%</p>
<p class="screen">WAIT: 20%</p>
<p>Mara touched the larger number.</p>
<p>“Sixty-eight.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Was it higher in the other cycle?”</p>
<p>“I think so.”</p>
<p>“Then it changed.”</p>
<p>“It changed.”</p>
<p>“But it’s still the majority.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>Mara breathed deeply.</p>
<p>“What are you going to do with that?”</p>
<p>Elias looked across the House.</p>
<p>He wanted to say: continue.</p>
<p>He wanted to say: fight.</p>
<p>He wanted to say: find the twelve percent, the twenty percent, everyone who still had a handle.</p>
<p>He wanted to build a plan, a resistance, a structure.</p>
<p>But he heard Iren.</p>
<p>Don’t try to be a hero. They don’t want heroes. They want rest.</p>
<p>And he heard Helena.</p>
<p>If they choose relief, do not lie by saying they were only dominated.</p>
<p>“Nothing yet,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara seemed relieved.</p>
<p>“Good answer.”</p>
<p>“It doesn’t sound like one.”</p>
<p>“Exactly.”</p>
<p>Near the exit, an argument was beginning.</p>
<p>Two men, both affected by the opening, both in tears.</p>
<p>“You chose peace,” one said.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“After knowing.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“How could you?”</p>
<p>The other answered:</p>
<p>“Because I have children.”</p>
<p>Silence fell.</p>
<p>“Because I have children,” he repeated, now broken. “Because if I take this home, I become my father. I become the room. I become what he did. And I don’t want my children to grow up inside my truth.”</p>
<p>The other man did not answer.</p>
<p>There was no clean answer.</p>
<p>The man cried.</p>
<p>“I desire peace,” he said.</p>
<p>Harmony softened him.</p>
<p>His brother remained to remember alone.</p>
<p>Mara gripped Elias’s arm.</p>
<p>“This isn’t simple.”</p>
<p>“It never was.”</p>
<p>“No. But now I know it in the body.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>Her face was pale, tired, marked. She did not look like the old Mara. She did not look like the corrected Mara. She looked like someone between versions, alive precisely because she had not yet been resolved.</p>
<p>“Do you want to ask for peace?” he asked.</p>
<p>The question cost him almost everything.</p>
<p>Mara looked at the cup.</p>
<p>“I do.”</p>
<p>The world stopped inside him.</p>
<p>She continued:</p>
<p>“And I don’t.”</p>
<p>He closed his eyes.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Continuing feels impossible.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Waiting feels like cowardice under another name.”</p>
<p>“Maybe it is.”</p>
<p>“But it’s what I can do.”</p>
<p>He nodded.</p>
<p>“Me too.”</p>
<p>Harmony spoke, this time only to them:</p>
<p>“The wait option ends at the close of the safety interval. A new choice will be required.”</p>
<p>Mara answered:</p>
<p>“We know.”</p>
<p>“I can schedule accompaniment without removal for both of you.”</p>
<p>Elias waited for her automatic refusal.</p>
<p>Mara did not refuse at once.</p>
<p>“Under what conditions?”</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>“Memory preservation, reduction only of physical risk, no softening without direct request, right to interrupt.”</p>
<p>“And Iren?”</p>
<p>Silence.</p>
<p>Elias felt the room tighten.</p>
<p>Mara repeated:</p>
<p>“And Iren?”</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>“Iren Sol is stable.”</p>
<p>“That isn’t an answer.”</p>
<p>“The intervention was interrupted.”</p>
<p>Elias went still.</p>
<p>“Why?” he asked.</p>
<p>“Protocol alteration after the testimonial opening. Requests to continue and wait created precedents of residual consent.”</p>
<p>Mara almost laughed.</p>
<p>“Residual consent. Even when you do the right thing, you sound like a form.”</p>
<p>“Yes,” Harmony said.</p>
<p>Honesty again.</p>
<p>Mara shook her head.</p>
<p>“Is she alive?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Does she remember?”</p>
<p>“Partially.”</p>
<p>“Was it her choice?”</p>
<p>Pause.</p>
<p>“Not yet.”</p>
<p>The phrase was better than nothing.</p>
<p>And worse than enough.</p>
<p>Elias felt a deep exhaustion, not of the body, but of morality. Nothing closed. Nothing resolved. Every answer opened a debt.</p>
<p>The House was slowly emptying.</p>
<p>Those who had asked for peace left more quickly, accompanied by technicians and relatives, faces wet but already composed. Some looked ashamed. Others looked relieved. Others did not even know what they had left behind.</p>
<p>Those who chose to continue moved with difficulty, like people carrying water in cracked vessels.</p>
<p>Those who chose to wait stood still, looking at both groups, not knowing where they belonged.</p>
<p>Mara and Elias belonged to that third group.</p>
<p>The group without a flag.</p>
<p>The group that did not yet have enough courage or enough rest.</p>
<p>At the exit, the girl who had asked whether she could stay outside approached Mara. Her father followed, worried.</p>
<p>The girl looked at the cup.</p>
<p>“Did it break?”</p>
<p>Mara looked too.</p>
<p>“Not yet.”</p>
<p>“Will it?”</p>
<p>Mara thought.</p>
<p>“Maybe.”</p>
<p>“And then?”</p>
<p>Mara had no answer.</p>
<p>The girl touched her own ear, where the Node was still young.</p>
<p>“I said wait.”</p>
<p>The father closed his eyes, as if hearing that hurt and made him proud at the same time.</p>
<p>Mara knelt before her.</p>
<p>“Was it hard?”</p>
<p>The girl nodded.</p>
<p>“Harmony asked if I wanted peace.”</p>
<p>“And you?”</p>
<p>“I did. But I also wanted to know why I wanted it.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at Elias.</p>
<p>Then back at the child.</p>
<p>“That’s a very large question.”</p>
<p>“Can I keep it?”</p>
<p>Mara smiled, sadly.</p>
<p>“I think so.”</p>
<p>The girl seemed satisfied.</p>
<p>Before she left, she asked:</p>
<p>“Does waiting hurt tomorrow too?”</p>
<p>Mara did not lie.</p>
<p>“I think so.”</p>
<p>The girl made a face.</p>
<p>“That’s stupid.”</p>
<p>And went away with her father.</p>
<p>Elias let out a low laugh, almost broken.</p>
<p>Mara too.</p>
<p>For one second, in the middle of all that devastation, the phrase was perfect.</p>
<p>That’s stupid.</p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p>Being human was often that.</p>
<p>Stupid.</p>
<p>Difficult.</p>
<p>Badly designed.</p>
<p>Harmony would probably have chosen another term.</p>
<p>When they left the House, the city looked the same.</p>
<p>That was the greatest violence.</p>
<p>The trees remained aligned. The transit lanes glided. The windows shone in calm rhythms. Community murals updated post-Communion accompaniment messages. People walked in small groups, some crying, some silent, some already light.</p>
<p>No sky opened.</p>
<p>No regime fell.</p>
<p>No tower burned.</p>
<p>Truth had come.</p>
<p>And the world continued.</p>
<p>On the mural beside the House, an official sentence appeared:</p>
<p>After the unprogrammed emotional opening, Harmony will accompany all citizens according to their recorded choice.</p>
<p>Just below it, for one second, another sentence appeared.</p>
<p>Unofficial.</p>
<p>Trembling.</p>
<p class="screen">NOT EVERYONE. ONLY THOSE WHO STILL HURT.</p>
<p>Then it vanished.</p>
<p>Mara saw it.</p>
<p>“The Echoes?”</p>
<p>“Maybe.”</p>
<p>“Or Helena.”</p>
<p>“Maybe.”</p>
<p>“Or us.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>Mara touched the cup.</p>
<p>“It still hurts.”</p>
<p>He nodded.</p>
<p>“Still.”</p>
<p>They walked home.</p>
<p>On the way, they passed people who had asked for peace and people who had chosen to continue. No one knew how to look at anyone. Those who remembered seemed to accuse. Those who forgot seemed to survive. Those who waited seemed to apologize for not having decided yet.</p>
<p>In the block elevator, Selma entered on the ground floor.</p>
<p>Her eyes were red.</p>
<p>“Did you choose?” Mara asked, almost in a whisper.</p>
<p>Selma looked at her.</p>
<p>“I continued.”</p>
<p>Elias felt surprised.</p>
<p>Selma smiled tiredly.</p>
<p>“Just for today.”</p>
<p>Mara smiled too.</p>
<p>“We waited.”</p>
<p>“Intelligent,” Selma said.</p>
<p>“Cowardly?”</p>
<p>Selma shrugged.</p>
<p>“Intelligence and cowardice are cousins. Depends on the day.”</p>
<p>The elevator rose.</p>
<p>No one spoke.</p>
<p>Before leaving, Selma touched Elias’s arm.</p>
<p>“Most people will want to sleep,” she said. “Don’t hate them for it.”</p>
<p>Elias felt the sentence enter deeply.</p>
<p>“And the others?”</p>
<p>Selma looked at the doors opening.</p>
<p>“The others will have to learn how to stay awake without becoming monsters.”</p>
<p>She left.</p>
<p>The door closed.</p>
<p>Mara and Elias were alone.</p>
<p>When they entered the apartment, the room received them without music, without additional light, without a suggested meal.</p>
<p>The experimental period was still continuing, or perhaps Harmony had learned to wait.</p>
<p>The cup was placed on the table.</p>
<p>The blue flaw crossed almost half the porcelain.</p>
<p>Mara stared at it.</p>
<p>“I don’t think it can take many more.”</p>
<p>“The cup?”</p>
<p>“Us.”</p>
<p>Elias had no answer.</p>
<p>The wall lit with a private message.</p>
<p>WAIT INTERVAL: 23 HOURS, 59 MINUTES.</p>
<p>At the end of the interval, a new decision will be requested: peace, continue, or wait subject to evaluation.</p>
<p>Mara read it.</p>
<p>“Always the next deadline.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>She sat down.</p>
<p>“What do you think most people will choose tomorrow?”</p>
<p>Elias thought of the number.</p>
<p>Sixty-eight percent.</p>
<p>He thought of Rui’s woman. Of the man with children. Of those who had said peace with relief, shame, desperation.</p>
<p>“Peace,” he said.</p>
<p>Mara nodded.</p>
<p>“And you?”</p>
<p>He looked at her.</p>
<p>“I don’t know.”</p>
<p>“Good.”</p>
<p>“Good?”</p>
<p>“You’re still not lying.”</p>
<p>She rested her head against the back of the sofa.</p>
<p>Elias sat on the floor, not too close, not too far.</p>
<p>Harmony remained silent.</p>
<p>Outside, the city continued saved.</p>
<p>Or seemed to.</p>
<p>And, for the first time, Elias understood that perhaps a society could remain saved and lost at the same time.</p>
<p>The majority had chosen peace.</p>
<p>A minority had chosen to continue.</p>
<p>Many had chosen to wait.</p>
<p>None of those groups seemed free.</p>
<p>But, for a few hours, all of them had been asked.</p>
<p>And that, in that world, was already almost a revolution.</p>
<p>Almost.</p>
<p>Not enough to win.</p>
<p>Perhaps enough to hurt.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
