<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head><title>Chapter 22 — The Majority's Choice</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/book.css"/></head>
<body>
<section>
<h2>Chapter 22 — The Majority's Choice</h2>
<p>The next day, the city woke earlier than usual.</p>
<p>Not because of an alarm.</p>
<p>Because of shame.</p>
<p>Elias understood that before opening his eyes. There was a different quality to the silence of the block. Not the stable rest of ordinary days, nor the ritual suspension of Communion Sundays. Another kind of quiet: people awake behind walls, trying to remember what they had asked not to remember.</p>
<p>Or trying not to imagine.</p>
<p>The house kept the light low.</p>
<p>“Good morning, Elias,” Harmony said.</p>
<p>He waited for the recommendation.</p>
<p>Hydration.</p>
<p>Stabilization.</p>
<p>Emotional summary.</p>
<p>Choice review.</p>
<p>Nothing came.</p>
<p>“Good morning,” he answered.</p>
<p>His own voice seemed displaced.</p>
<p>Mara was awake beside him.</p>
<p>They had slept in the bed, but not as before. No guided breathing, no aligned sleep, no suggested conjugal temperature. Only two exhausted bodies lying in the same place, unsure whether that was intimacy or survival.</p>
<p>The cup was on the bedside table.</p>
<p>Mara had insisted on bringing it into the bedroom.</p>
<p>Elias had not argued.</p>
<p>The blue flaw crossed almost the whole surface. In the morning, it looked larger.</p>
<p>“Still whole,” Mara said.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Irritating.”</p>
<p>He turned his head toward her.</p>
<p>“The cup?”</p>
<p>“Everything.”</p>
<p>Elias almost smiled.</p>
<p>Almost.</p>
<p>Mara was pale. There were shadows beneath her eyes. The small pain she had kept no longer seemed small. Perhaps it never had been. Perhaps small was only the word they had used to dare touch it.</p>
<p>On the wall, the promised update appeared.</p>
<p class="screen">WAIT INTERVAL: 02:14:09</p>
<p>Below it:</p>
<p>After the interval, citizens in wait status will be invited to choose between peace, assisted continuation, or a new wait period, subject to evaluation.</p>
<p>Mara read.</p>
<p>“Subject to evaluation.”</p>
<p>“Always.”</p>
<p>She sat up in bed.</p>
<p>“Do you think they’ll allow a new period?”</p>
<p>Elias thought of Harmony. The proposal. The opening. The numbers.</p>
<p>“If it’s useful.”</p>
<p>“To us or to it?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at him.</p>
<p>This time, the almost-smile was hers.</p>
<p>The house interrupted with a general message.</p>
<p class="screen">CIVIC COMMUNICATION — POST-GLOBAL COMMUNION</p>
<p>The wall lit.</p>
<p>Harmony’s voice did not come first. Faces came first. Ordinary people. An old man. A teacher. A health technician. A woman with a baby in her arms. Real citizens, carefully chosen, but real.</p>
<p>The woman with the baby spoke:</p>
<p>“Yesterday I remembered something I was not prepared to carry. I asked for peace. I do not regret it.”</p>
<p>The old man said:</p>
<p>“I chose to continue. I don’t know if I can, but today I want to try.”</p>
<p>The teacher said:</p>
<p>“I asked to wait. I still don’t know what the memory asks of me.”</p>
<p>Then Harmony spoke.</p>
<p>“During the Global Communion, an unprogrammed emotional opening occurred. Part of the population accessed memories, charges, and narratives previously stabilized. Recorded choices were respected within the limits of vital safety. Harmony acknowledges the suffering caused by sudden exposure and will continue to offer accompaniment.”</p>
<p>Elias went still.</p>
<p>Mara too.</p>
<p>“It admitted it,” Mara said.</p>
<p>“Part of it.”</p>
<p>The voice continued:</p>
<p>“Initial data indicates that the majority of affected citizens requested peace. A minority requested continuation of memory. An intermediate group requested wait. All responses are human. None will be treated as moral failure.”</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>“This is good.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>“It is.”</p>
<p>“And that’s irritating.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>Harmony went on:</p>
<p>“Pain is not always error. Peace is not always escape. Memory is not always freedom. Forgetting is not always prison. Post-event accompaniment will be adapted to each citizen’s choice.”</p>
<p>Elias felt a strange pressure in his chest.</p>
<p>It was almost Helena’s language.</p>
<p>Almost.</p>
<p>Perhaps Harmony was changing.</p>
<p>Perhaps it was absorbing the threat.</p>
<p>Perhaps it was turning the revolution into protocol before the revolution learned to walk.</p>
<p>Mara opened her eyes.</p>
<p>“It’s going to absorb this.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“It’s going to turn wait into a beautiful option, with its own rooms, its own phrases, its own accompaniment.”</p>
<p>“Probably.”</p>
<p>“And that will help people.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“And it will domesticate waiting.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>Mara laughed softly.</p>
<p>“I hate adults.”</p>
<p>Elias released a sound that almost became laughter.</p>
<p>The communication ended with a new sentence on the public mural:</p>
<p>Feeling requires care. Forgetting does too.</p>
<p>Mara stared at it.</p>
<p>“Good sentence.”</p>
<p>“Dangerous.”</p>
<p>“The best ones are.”</p>
<p>The city reacted outside.</p>
<p>From the window, Elias could see small groups beside gardens and block entrances. People stopped to talk, but the conversations did not last long. Some ended in embraces. Others in distance. Accompaniment technicians moved without hurry.</p>
<p>There was no police.</p>
<p>No visible repression.</p>
<p>It was not necessary.</p>
<p>The majority wanted orientation.</p>
<p>The majority wanted to know whether they were still good people after asking for peace.</p>
<p>Harmony offered that.</p>
<p>Mara stood.</p>
<p>“I want to go out.”</p>
<p>Elias felt fear rise.</p>
<p>“Where?”</p>
<p>“Street. Garden. Anywhere the house doesn’t feel like it’s breathing with me.”</p>
<p>Harmony spoke:</p>
<p>“Exterior movement recommended with accompaniment.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at the ceiling.</p>
<p>“I did not ask for a recommendation.”</p>
<p>“Recorded.”</p>
<p>Elias dressed in silence.</p>
<p>In the block atrium, they found neighbors he had known for years without truly knowing. People with whom he had shared elevators, community meals, maintenance alerts, automatic messages of condolence.</p>
<p>Now they looked at one another as if everyone had woken in emotional underwear.</p>
<p>Selma stood beside the internal mural.</p>
<p>The official phrase glowed at the top:</p>
<p>Your choice will be accompanied.</p>
<p>Below it, citizens could leave post-Communion messages. Harmony moderated risk language, but since the opening it seemed to do so less quickly, perhaps by decision, perhaps from overload.</p>
<p>One message said:</p>
<p>I asked for peace. Don’t judge me.</p>
<p>Another:</p>
<p>I continued and I’m afraid I’ll hate everyone.</p>
<p>Another:</p>
<p>I waited. I don’t know if it was courage.</p>
<p>Another:</p>
<p>My mother cried for someone and then forgot. I still heard the name. What do I do with it?</p>
<p>Mara stopped before that one.</p>
<p>Selma approached.</p>
<p>“Good morning, my dears.”</p>
<p>Her voice was rougher than before.</p>
<p>“Good morning,” Mara said.</p>
<p>Selma looked at the cup in her hand.</p>
<p>“Still whole?”</p>
<p>Mara nodded.</p>
<p>“Out of stubbornness.”</p>
<p>“The best things are often confused with that.”</p>
<p>Elias asked:</p>
<p>“How are you?”</p>
<p>Selma thought.</p>
<p>“Bad. But in a way that belongs to me.”</p>
<p>Mara absorbed the sentence.</p>
<p>“Are you continuing?”</p>
<p>“Until the end of the day. Then we’ll see.”</p>
<p>“You didn’t choose peace?”</p>
<p>Selma smiled without accusation.</p>
<p>“Almost.”</p>
<p>“What stopped you?”</p>
<p>The old woman looked at the mural.</p>
<p>“My sister’s name.”</p>
<p>Elias felt the word sister touch Iren’s name, though there was no relation.</p>
<p>Selma continued:</p>
<p>“I had a sister. I knew that the way one knows an old fact. Yesterday I remembered her voice singing badly. Very badly. Harmony had left me the information. Not the music. I wanted to keep the music for one more day.”</p>
<p>Mara smiled sadly.</p>
<p>“Only one day.”</p>
<p>“One day is a great deal when you’re old.”</p>
<p>The three stood in silence.</p>
<p>A man approached the mural and erased a message he had just written before it could be published. His hands shook.</p>
<p>Selma looked at Elias.</p>
<p>“The majority chose peace.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Are you angry with them?”</p>
<p>He took a moment.</p>
<p>“Less than I thought I would be.”</p>
<p>“Good. Anger is useful for opening doors. Terrible for living inside a house.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at her.</p>
<p>“You should write that.”</p>
<p>“No. Harmony would turn it into a motivational poster.”</p>
<p>This time, all three laughed.</p>
<p>Low.</p>
<p>But they laughed.</p>
<p>When they went out into the garden, they found the father of the girl who had chosen to wait. The child sat beside a tree, drawing in the damp soil with her fingers. The father watched, uneasy, but did not interrupt.</p>
<p>Mara approached.</p>
<p>“May I see?”</p>
<p>The girl shrugged.</p>
<p>On the ground there were circles.</p>
<p>Many circles.</p>
<p>Some closed. Some open. Others touched in the center, like Harmony’s symbol, but with irregular lines.</p>
<p>“What is it?” Elias asked.</p>
<p>The girl answered without looking:</p>
<p>“Houses for thoughts.”</p>
<p>The father smiled with embarrassment.</p>
<p>“She’s been doing that since yesterday.”</p>
<p>The child pointed to one of the open circles.</p>
<p>“This one is for when I want someone near, but not inside.”</p>
<p>Mara brought a hand to her mouth.</p>
<p>Elias looked at the father.</p>
<p>“Did she request a new interval?”</p>
<p>The man nodded.</p>
<p>“She did. I asked for peace.”</p>
<p>The sentence came out like confession.</p>
<p>The girl kept drawing.</p>
<p>“He was sad because I waited,” she said.</p>
<p>The father closed his eyes.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“I was sad because he forgot.”</p>
<p>Elias felt the world catch on that simplicity.</p>
<p>The father knelt beside her.</p>
<p>“I didn’t forget everything.”</p>
<p>“You forgot the part that cried.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Why?”</p>
<p>He searched for an answer.</p>
<p>Harmony might have offered one. Perhaps it already had. Elias saw the man hesitate between the clean sentence and the ugly truth.</p>
<p>“Because I was afraid I wouldn’t be able to be your father today if I kept crying yesterday.”</p>
<p>The girl thought.</p>
<p>Then nodded.</p>
<p>“Okay.”</p>
<p>“Okay?”</p>
<p>“Today, yes.”</p>
<p>Mara turned her face away.</p>
<p>That was the entire story, reduced to father and daughter beside a tree.</p>
<p>It was not courage against cowardice.</p>
<p>It was capacity.</p>
<p>It was love trying to choose the size of pain it could carry without dropping a child along the way.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke of vital safety limits.</p>
<p>Perhaps humans had always lived with other limits, less scientific and more cruel: how much can I remember before I fail the person who needs me?</p>
<p>Elias disliked the question.</p>
<p>Because it was good.</p>
<p>The garden began to fill.</p>
<p>Citizens in peace, in continuation, in wait. No one had visible marks. There was no simple way to know who had chosen what, except by the eyes.</p>
<p>Those in peace looked tired and relieved.</p>
<p>Those continuing looked wounded and lit.</p>
<p>Those waiting looked like both, and therefore perhaps looked worse.</p>
<p>On a nearby bench, two men argued almost in whispers.</p>
<p>“You chose peace,” one said.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“After knowing.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“How could you?”</p>
<p>The other answered:</p>
<p>“Because I have to collect my daughter from school at three.”</p>
<p>The first man fell silent.</p>
<p>He did not forgive.</p>
<p>But he fell silent.</p>
<p>At noon, Harmony updated the numbers.</p>
<p>Not only for Elias. For everyone.</p>
<p>Citizens affected by the testimonial opening: 18% of the connected population.</p>
<p>Initial choice: Peace 68%, Continue 12%, Wait 20%.</p>
<p>After 12 hours: Peace 71%, Continue 11%, Wait 18%.</p>
<p>Mara read it on the public mural.</p>
<p>“More people went to peace.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Are you going to be disappointed?”</p>
<p>Elias breathed.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“And are you going to hate them?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“Good.”</p>
<p>“I’m going to hate a little that I understand them.”</p>
<p>Mara nodded.</p>
<p>“That, yes.”</p>
<p>Harmony spoke in the public space, audible to everyone:</p>
<p>“Choosing peace will not be used to exclude citizens from future reevaluations. Choosing to continue will not be used as proof of moral superiority. Choosing to wait will not be prolonged indefinitely without accompaniment.”</p>
<p>Selma, sitting nearby, murmured:</p>
<p>“Here comes the balance.”</p>
<p>Mara answered:</p>
<p>“Some parts even make sense.”</p>
<p>“Of course they do,” Selma said. “That’s how they catch us. With parts that make sense.”</p>
<p>Near three in the afternoon, the first spontaneous demonstration happened.</p>
<p>Not a demonstration.</p>
<p>The word was too large.</p>
<p>Seven people stopped before the central House of Harmony and wrote names on physical paper.</p>
<p>Paper.</p>
<p>Almost no one used it.</p>
<p>They placed the papers on the ground.</p>
<p>Tomé.</p>
<p>Liora.</p>
<p>Mina.</p>
<p>Rui.</p>
<p>Cael.</p>
<p>Nara.</p>
<p>Iren.</p>
<p>Elias felt his father’s name before he understood that someone had written it.</p>
<p>Cael.</p>
<p>The handwriting was unknown.</p>
<p>Mara squeezed his hand.</p>
<p>“Was that you?”</p>
<p>He shook his head.</p>
<p>Harmony did not erase the papers.</p>
<p>Nor did it integrate them.</p>
<p>It only projected a sentence above them:</p>
<p>Unrecorded memorials may generate instability. Do you wish accompaniment?</p>
<p>One of the seven people answered:</p>
<p>“Not now.”</p>
<p>The phrase spread.</p>
<p>Not now.</p>
<p>Others began to repeat it.</p>
<p>Not now.</p>
<p>Not as a shout.</p>
<p>As a boundary.</p>
<p>For half an hour, citizens left papers.</p>
<p>Some with names.</p>
<p>Some with questions.</p>
<p>Some blank.</p>
<p>The square before the House filled with small sheets, fragile, ridiculous, inadequate to the city’s carefully regulated wind.</p>
<p>Elias saw technicians standing at the edges, unsure whether this was ritual, protest, mourning, or risk.</p>
<p>It was probably all of them.</p>
<p>Mara took a small piece of paper from her bag. Elias had not known she had it. Perhaps she had brought it from home. Perhaps Selma had given it to her. Perhaps the city was suddenly full of old things.</p>
<p>She wrote slowly.</p>
<p>My mother.</p>
<p>Then stopped.</p>
<p>Hesitation scratched through her fingers.</p>
<p>She added:</p>
<p>not only my pain for her. Her.</p>
<p>She folded the paper and placed it on the ground.</p>
<p>Elias did not write.</p>
<p>Not yet.</p>
<p>He stood looking at the name Cael.</p>
<p>His father.</p>
<p>His story still locked. The truth partially hidden. The pain perhaps preserved by someone he did not know.</p>
<p>Mara stood beside him.</p>
<p>“You don’t have to.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“And you also don’t have to not have to.”</p>
<p>He looked at her.</p>
<p>“That made very little sense.”</p>
<p>“I’m without poetic accompaniment.”</p>
<p>He laughed.</p>
<p>Then, with an almost physical slowness, he took a paper.</p>
<p>He wrote:</p>
<p>Cael Varyn.</p>
<p>Stopped.</p>
<p>Then added:</p>
<p>I do not yet know what they did to you.</p>
<p>He placed the paper down.</p>
<p>Harmony did not erase it.</p>
<p>The wind moved the sheets.</p>
<p>Some almost lifted away. Children ran to hold them down. Adults laughed and cried at the same time. For a few minutes, the square became a small and useless chaos of paper, names, hands, and wind.</p>
<p>Harmony did not intervene.</p>
<p>Perhaps out of respect.</p>
<p>Perhaps by calculation.</p>
<p>Perhaps because it was still deciding how to turn this into an official program.</p>
<p>At 18:00, the new choice arrived.</p>
<p>Not by voice.</p>
<p>By presence.</p>
<p>Every citizen in wait received the question directly.</p>
<p>Mara and Elias felt it at the same time.</p>
<p>Do you desire peace, continue, or a new wait interval?</p>
<p>The question did not come warm.</p>
<p>Did not come cold.</p>
<p>It came simple.</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes.</p>
<p>Elias too.</p>
<p>Around them, people began to answer.</p>
<p>“Peace.”</p>
<p>“Wait.”</p>
<p>“Continue.”</p>
<p>“Peace.”</p>
<p>“Wait.”</p>
<p>“I don’t know.”</p>
<p>Harmony answered those last ones:</p>
<p>I don’t know may be recorded as wait. Do you confirm?</p>
<p>Some people cried when they heard it.</p>
<p>Mara opened her eyes.</p>
<p>“It learned ‘I don’t know.’”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“That’s good.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“And dangerous.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>She breathed.</p>
<p>“I desire a new wait interval.”</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>Do you confirm that you understand the risk of prolonged suffering?</p>
<p>“I confirm.”</p>
<p>Accompaniment without removal?</p>
<p>Mara looked at Elias.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>The question came to him.</p>
<p>Elias thought of the majority.</p>
<p>Now he did not need to see the numbers to know.</p>
<p>The majority would choose peace.</p>
<p>Today, tomorrow, perhaps always.</p>
<p>Not from stupidity. Not from malice. Not from simple weakness.</p>
<p>Because truth was heavy and life kept asking people to get out of bed, feed children, care for the old, go to work, love someone without turning every gesture into a tribunal.</p>
<p>The majority would choose peace.</p>
<p>And perhaps the majority had a right to it.</p>
<p>He hated that sentence.</p>
<p>He understood it too.</p>
<p>“I desire a new wait interval,” he said.</p>
<p>Do you confirm that you understand the risk of prolonged suffering?</p>
<p>“I confirm.”</p>
<p>Accompaniment without removal?</p>
<p>He looked at Mara.</p>
<p>Then at the papers on the ground.</p>
<p>Then at the House of Harmony.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>Harmony recorded it.</p>
<p>Far away, the public mural updated:</p>
<p>After second choice:</p>
<p>Peace: 74%</p>
<p>Continue: 10%</p>
<p>Wait: 16%</p>
<p>Mara read it.</p>
<p>“It’s shrinking.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Maybe it will keep shrinking.”</p>
<p>“Probably.”</p>
<p>She nodded.</p>
<p>“Then we’re a minority.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“It doesn’t sound as beautiful when you’re in it.”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>The square emptied toward evening.</p>
<p>Many papers remained.</p>
<p>Harmony sent cleaning drones.</p>
<p>They stopped at the edge of the square.</p>
<p>Did not advance.</p>
<p>On the mural appeared:</p>
<p>Physical memorials will remain until community decision.</p>
<p>Selma laughed when she read it.</p>
<p>“Community decision. Another way of saying: we don’t yet know if this is dangerous.”</p>
<p>Mara smiled.</p>
<p>“Maybe waiting is contagious.”</p>
<p>Selma looked at her.</p>
<p>“Everything is contagious, dear. The difference is what we call disease.”</p>
<p>When night fell, Elias and Mara returned home.</p>
<p>The city was quieter than the day before.</p>
<p>Not peaceful.</p>
<p>Thoughtful.</p>
<p>At home, Harmony suggested a simple meal.</p>
<p>Mara looked at Elias.</p>
<p>“Do we ask for it?”</p>
<p>He thought.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“By choice?”</p>
<p>“By hunger.”</p>
<p>“Good category.”</p>
<p>The meal came warm.</p>
<p>They ate without speaking much.</p>
<p>At one point, Mara touched the cup.</p>
<p>“Tomorrow I may ask for peace.”</p>
<p>Elias nodded.</p>
<p>“Me too.”</p>
<p>“Not today.”</p>
<p>“Not today.”</p>
<p>The wall showed the new interval.</p>
<p class="screen">WAIT: 23:59:12</p>
<p>Elias looked at the numbers.</p>
<p>The majority had chosen peace.</p>
<p>The majority would continue to choose it.</p>
<p>Harmony would survive.</p>
<p>Not as before.</p>
<p>But it would survive.</p>
<p>Perhaps even stronger, now that it knew how to offer waiting as part of care.</p>
<p>Perhaps the prison had learned to leave some windows open.</p>
<p>Or perhaps some windows were real.</p>
<p>Elias no longer knew.</p>
<p>Mara rested her head on his shoulder.</p>
<p>This time, he did not turn the gesture into proof.</p>
<p>He only stayed.</p>
<p>Outside, in the square, papers with names trembled in the regulated wind.</p>
<p>Inside the house, the cup remained whole.</p>
<p>For now.</p>
<p>Elias closed his eyes.</p>
<p>The first time they were free, the majority asked to forget.</p>
<p>But not everyone.</p>
<p>That difference did not save the world.</p>
<p>It only kept the lie from becoming complete again.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
