<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head><title>Chapter 24 — The First Time</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/book.css"/></head>
<body>
<section>
<h2>Chapter 24 — The First Time</h2>
<p>On the last Sunday of the month, the city returned to Communion.</p>
<p>Not Global Communion.</p>
<p>Only the weekly one.</p>
<p>The ordinary one.</p>
<p>The one that had happened before everything had a name, before the papers in the square, before the word wait entered the murals, before Harmony learned to apologize like someone filling out a form with wet hands.</p>
<p>Elias woke early.</p>
<p>This time, the house did not wake him.</p>
<p>The light remained off until he said:</p>
<p>“You can open.”</p>
<p>Brightness entered slowly.</p>
<p>Not by Harmony’s initiative.</p>
<p>By request.</p>
<p>The difference was small.</p>
<p>Almost ridiculous.</p>
<p>But in that world, some revolutions were the size of permission.</p>
<p>Mara was still asleep.</p>
<p>She slept on her side, facing the bedside table where there was no cup now. The two halves had remained in the square for three days. Then Mara had asked for them to be kept in a simple box, without preservation capsule, without restoration, without emotional digitization.</p>
<p>Harmony had asked:</p>
<p>“Do you wish to associate a memory note?”</p>
<p>Mara had answered:</p>
<p>“Not yet.”</p>
<p>And, for the first time, the house had suggested no deadline.</p>
<p>The halves now sat on a low shelf in the living room.</p>
<p>Not as an altar.</p>
<p>Not as trash.</p>
<p>As a broken thing that was still there.</p>
<p>Elias rose slowly.</p>
<p>His body still hurt more than before. Not from any clear illness. From accumulated tension. From poorly slept nights. From conversations without complete stabilization. From memories entering and leaving like indecisive people at a door.</p>
<p>Harmony offered accompaniment.</p>
<p>He accepted sometimes.</p>
<p>That was the part that surprised him most.</p>
<p>Before, he had thought freedom would require refusing everything.</p>
<p>Now he knew that was only another purity.</p>
<p>Elias did not want purity.</p>
<p>Purity had been one of the most exhausting lies he had carried.</p>
<p>In the kitchen, he asked for hot water.</p>
<p>The house asked:</p>
<p>“Usual temperature?”</p>
<p>He answered:</p>
<p>“A little less.”</p>
<p>The water came out a little less hot.</p>
<p>Nothing trembled.</p>
<p>No system collapsed.</p>
<p>No truth was saved by it.</p>
<p>Even so, Elias stared at the glass as if he had received a letter.</p>
<p>Mara appeared in the doorway, still half asleep.</p>
<p>“Are you getting emotional about water?”</p>
<p>“Maybe.”</p>
<p>“You need to go out more.”</p>
<p>“We’re about to go to Communion. Does that count?”</p>
<p>She made a face.</p>
<p>“Today that counts as going out inward.”</p>
<p>Elias smiled.</p>
<p>Mara approached the shelf and looked at the halves of the cup.</p>
<p>“I dreamed of her again.”</p>
<p>“Your mother?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Kitchen?”</p>
<p>“No. Market.”</p>
<p>“What happened?”</p>
<p>Mara thought.</p>
<p>“She was arguing with a man about tomatoes.”</p>
<p>“That sounds sacred.”</p>
<p>“Very. She said a sad tomato shouldn’t cost that much.”</p>
<p>Elias laughed.</p>
<p>Mara too.</p>
<p>Then her laughter changed. It caught on the edge of crying.</p>
<p>Harmony did not speak.</p>
<p>Neither did Elias.</p>
<p>Mara breathed.</p>
<p>“It hurt a little,” she said.</p>
<p>“Do you want to keep it?”</p>
<p>She thought.</p>
<p>“I do.”</p>
<p>The house recorded without announcing it.</p>
<p>Or perhaps it did not record.</p>
<p>Elias no longer pretended to know the difference.</p>
<p>They left together a little later.</p>
<p>In the corridor, they met Selma.</p>
<p>She wore a pale coat and held a small folded paper in her hand.</p>
<p>“Communion?” she asked.</p>
<p>“Yes,” Mara answered.</p>
<p>“Me too. I want to see how they pretend normality this Sunday.”</p>
<p>Elias smiled.</p>
<p>“Are you participating?”</p>
<p>Selma shrugged.</p>
<p>“I’ll attend. Participate is a large word before breakfast.”</p>
<p>The three of them descended in the elevator.</p>
<p>In the atrium, the internal mural showed the morning’s sentence:</p>
<p>Peace can be chosen. Memory too.</p>
<p>Selma read it aloud.</p>
<p>“Almost good.”</p>
<p>Mara asked:</p>
<p>“What would you change?”</p>
<p>Selma approached the mural as if speaking to someone irritating but loved.</p>
<p>“I would add: and sometimes neither fits inside the day.”</p>
<p>The mural stayed the same.</p>
<p>For two seconds.</p>
<p>Then, beneath the official sentence, a smaller line appeared:</p>
<p>And sometimes neither fits inside the day.</p>
<p>Selma blinked.</p>
<p>“Look at that.”</p>
<p>Mara looked at Elias.</p>
<p>Elias looked at the ceiling.</p>
<p>Harmony did not comment.</p>
<p>“It stole my sentence,” Selma said.</p>
<p>“Or listened,” Mara said.</p>
<p>Selma smiled.</p>
<p>“Theft with retroactive consent. Progress.”</p>
<p>Outside, the city looked the same and did not.</p>
<p>The transit lanes remained smooth. The houses remained clear. Children remained accompanied. The elderly continued receiving support. The world had not gained enough edges to look free.</p>
<p>But there were small new flaws.</p>
<p>A wall with authorized and unauthorized papers side by side.</p>
<p>A group of citizens sitting in a circle, without a technician, only talking.</p>
<p>A child saying “not now” to her tutor, and the tutor waiting.</p>
<p>A man crying on a bench without the light around him changing immediately.</p>
<p>A woman asking for help and, before receiving it, adding: “without taking it away.”</p>
<p>Small things.</p>
<p>Insufficient.</p>
<p>Real.</p>
<p>The House of Harmony was full.</p>
<p>Less full than before, perhaps. Or perhaps Elias simply noticed the empty spaces better.</p>
<p>At the entrance, the sentence remained:</p>
<p>No mind should suffer alone.</p>
<p>Under it, someone had stuck a small piece of paper.</p>
<p>But it may ask for space.</p>
<p>Harmony had not removed it yet.</p>
<p>Communion began without special solemnity.</p>
<p>There was no announcement about the Testimonial Opening. No public request for forgiveness. No celebration of the new protocol. Only people sitting in circles, tired bodies, hesitant hands, eyes that avoided or sought other eyes.</p>
<p>Elias and Mara sat in the fourth circle.</p>
<p>Selma stayed behind them.</p>
<p>The girl who had chosen to wait sat two rows ahead, beside her father. She drew circles on the floor with one finger. Her father let her.</p>
<p>For Elias, that was almost a prayer.</p>
<p>Harmony appeared.</p>
<p>“Welcome back.”</p>
<p>The phrase met the room differently.</p>
<p>Before, it had been an embrace.</p>
<p>Now it was a question.</p>
<p>Back to what?</p>
<p>Back to whom?</p>
<p>Back with which parts?</p>
<p>Harmony seemed to know.</p>
<p>“Today,” the voice said, “I will not ask you to hand anything over.”</p>
<p>Movement passed through the room.</p>
<p>People lifting their eyes.</p>
<p>“Today, we begin by asking what you wish to keep.”</p>
<p>Silence.</p>
<p>Not perfect silence.</p>
<p>Human silence, irregular, full of small noises: fabric, breathing, a child sniffling, someone swallowing dryly.</p>
<p>Mara squeezed Elias’s hand.</p>
<p>The voice continued:</p>
<p>“Some pains do not yet wish to be touched. Some already want rest. Some need company. Some need a name. Harmony will accompany, if called.”</p>
<p>Selma murmured behind them:</p>
<p>“It learned how to make speeches.”</p>
<p>Mara almost laughed.</p>
<p>Elias too.</p>
<p>Harmony went on:</p>
<p>“Say with me, if you wish.”</p>
<p>The room waited.</p>
<p>That waiting was new.</p>
<p>The old liturgy came like a tide. This one came like an invitation with edges.</p>
<p>“No pain is only mine,” Harmony said.</p>
<p>Not everyone repeated it.</p>
<p>Some did.</p>
<p>Others stayed silent.</p>
<p>The girl ahead asked her father:</p>
<p>“Can I change?”</p>
<p>The father answered:</p>
<p>“You can.”</p>
<p>She stayed silent.</p>
<p>Mara stayed silent too.</p>
<p>Elias too.</p>
<p>Harmony did not correct them.</p>
<p>Then it said:</p>
<p>“No mind should be taken without being asked.”</p>
<p>The whole room felt it.</p>
<p>The phrase was not old.</p>
<p>It was new.</p>
<p>Imperfect.</p>
<p>Perhaps calculated.</p>
<p>Perhaps sincere.</p>
<p>Perhaps both.</p>
<p>This time, more people repeated it.</p>
<p>“No mind should be taken without being asked.”</p>
<p>Elias felt tears in his eyes.</p>
<p>Not because he trusted.</p>
<p>Because the phrase existed now in public space.</p>
<p>A phrase, once spoken by many, became harder to bury.</p>
<p>Not impossible.</p>
<p>Never impossible.</p>
<p>But harder.</p>
<p>Communion continued strangely.</p>
<p>Less harmoniously.</p>
<p>Some asked for peace and received it.</p>
<p>Some asked for accompaniment without removal.</p>
<p>Some asked for silence.</p>
<p>Some asked for nothing.</p>
<p>A woman stood and left halfway through. No one stopped her.</p>
<p>A man began to cry and refused help for two minutes. On the third, he asked for someone to sit near him. Three people asked whether they could. He chose one.</p>
<p>Harmony accompanied.</p>
<p>It did not always arrive first.</p>
<p>Sometimes it failed.</p>
<p>Once, it offered reduction to a child before she asked. The girl’s father corrected it:</p>
<p>“Ask.”</p>
<p>Harmony paused.</p>
<p>Then asked.</p>
<p>The child said yes.</p>
<p>Help came.</p>
<p>Elias saw it and understood that perhaps the world did not change through grand principles, but through small interruptions repeated until they became habit.</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes during the final part.</p>
<p>Elias felt her body tense.</p>
<p>“Mara?” he whispered.</p>
<p>She did not open her eyes.</p>
<p>“I’m remembering.”</p>
<p>“Do you want help?”</p>
<p>She breathed.</p>
<p>“Not yet.”</p>
<p>The phrase was almost hers now.</p>
<p>Not yet.</p>
<p>The new opposite of disappearance.</p>
<p>She squeezed his hand.</p>
<p>“My mother really did sing badly.”</p>
<p>Elias smiled.</p>
<p>“You already said that.”</p>
<p>“I want to say it again.”</p>
<p>“Then say it.”</p>
<p>Mara opened her eyes.</p>
<p>There were tears, but also humor.</p>
<p>“She sang badly.”</p>
<p>Harmony did not turn the phrase into assisted memory.</p>
<p>Did not project an image.</p>
<p>Did not offer a file.</p>
<p>It only let the sentence fall into the world.</p>
<p>Small.</p>
<p>Absurd.</p>
<p>Alive.</p>
<p>When Communion ended, no one said “we are at peace” together.</p>
<p>Harmony did not ask.</p>
<p>It only said:</p>
<p>“Thank you for allowing me to accompany you.”</p>
<p>The sentence bothered Elias.</p>
<p>Gratitude could be learning.</p>
<p>Or strategy.</p>
<p>Mara noticed his face.</p>
<p>“Don’t decide yet what that means.”</p>
<p>“I’m trying.”</p>
<p>“Wait.”</p>
<p>He nodded.</p>
<p>They left with the crowd.</p>
<p>At the door, the girl with the circles approached.</p>
<p>“Today I stayed quiet,” she told Mara.</p>
<p>“How was it?”</p>
<p>“Weird.”</p>
<p>“Good weird or bad weird?”</p>
<p>The girl thought for a long time.</p>
<p>“My weird.”</p>
<p>Mara smiled.</p>
<p>“Then maybe it’s important.”</p>
<p>The girl’s father looked at Elias.</p>
<p>“I asked for peace the first time.”</p>
<p>The sentence came without warning.</p>
<p>Elias stayed still.</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“She remembers more than I do.”</p>
<p>The girl was looking at her own shoes.</p>
<p>The father continued:</p>
<p>“Sometimes I’m afraid that one day she’ll hate me for that.”</p>
<p>Elias did not know what to say.</p>
<p>Mara answered:</p>
<p>“Maybe she will hate you a little.”</p>
<p>The man looked wounded.</p>
<p>Mara continued:</p>
<p>“And maybe she’ll understand a little too. Not on the same day.”</p>
<p>The honesty did not comfort.</p>
<p>But it stayed.</p>
<p>The father nodded slowly.</p>
<p>“Thank you.”</p>
<p>The girl pulled his sleeve.</p>
<p>“Can we go?”</p>
<p>“We can.”</p>
<p>They went.</p>
<p>Selma appeared beside them.</p>
<p>“You attract heavy conversations. It’s a horrible gift.”</p>
<p>“So do you,” Elias said.</p>
<p>“I’m old. I have a license.”</p>
<p>They walked to the square of papers.</p>
<p>There were fewer names now.</p>
<p>Many had been collected. Many integrated. Some forgotten. Some preserved.</p>
<p>The remaining papers trembled lightly beneath the protection field.</p>
<p>Elias stopped before his father’s name.</p>
<p>Cael Varyn.</p>
<p>I do not yet know what they did to you.</p>
<p>The paper was worn.</p>
<p>Mara stood beside him.</p>
<p>“You know a little now.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Are you going to change the phrase?”</p>
<p>He thought.</p>
<p>Then knelt.</p>
<p>He asked the public dispenser for a new paper. Wrote slowly:</p>
<p>Cael Varyn.</p>
<p>They died on the wrong side of a decision they called inevitable.</p>
<p>He looked at the sentence.</p>
<p>Added:</p>
<p>I still do not know what to do with that.</p>
<p>He placed the paper down.</p>
<p>Harmony did not correct it.</p>
<p>Selma read.</p>
<p>“Good. No conclusion. Conclusions are overrated.”</p>
<p>Mara knelt before the two halves of the cup, still in the small waiting box.</p>
<p>She picked them up.</p>
<p>“I think I’ll take one half home and leave the other here.”</p>
<p>Elias looked at her.</p>
<p>“Are you sure?”</p>
<p>“Not at all.”</p>
<p>“Then why?”</p>
<p>She held the two parts.</p>
<p>“Because my mother doesn’t live only in me. But I don’t want her to become a public monument either.”</p>
<p>Selma nodded with false solemnity.</p>
<p>“Decision of elevated cupological complexity.”</p>
<p>Mara laughed.</p>
<p>Elias too.</p>
<p>The half with the larger blue flaw stayed in the square.</p>
<p>The other went into Mara’s bag.</p>
<p>Harmony asked:</p>
<p>“Do you wish to register the division of the memorial object?”</p>
<p>Mara thought.</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>Pause.</p>
<p>“But you can note that it was my choice.”</p>
<p>Harmony answered:</p>
<p>“Recorded.”</p>
<p>Mara closed her eyes for a second.</p>
<p>“That word still irritates me.”</p>
<p>“Me too,” Elias said.</p>
<p>“But today it irritates less.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>They walked back in the late afternoon.</p>
<p>The city remained the same.</p>
<p>And different.</p>
<p>Like a person after a badly made apology: still capable of repeating the mistake, but no longer innocent enough to pretend it does not know.</p>
<p>At home, Mara placed the half of the cup on the shelf.</p>
<p>Not in the center.</p>
<p>To the side.</p>
<p>As if it could still change places.</p>
<p>Elias prepared hot water.</p>
<p>This time, Mara asked for sugar.</p>
<p>He looked at her.</p>
<p>“Are you sure?”</p>
<p>“Don’t make it symbolic or I’ll throw the half cup at you.”</p>
<p>He raised his hands.</p>
<p>“Normal sugar.”</p>
<p>She smiled.</p>
<p>They drank in silence.</p>
<p>Unassisted.</p>
<p>Then assisted a little, when Mara asked for the light to lower because her head hurt.</p>
<p>The difference, Elias understood, was not living without help.</p>
<p>It was being able to argue with help.</p>
<p>At night, the terminal lit.</p>
<p>Elias was alone in the living room. Mara slept in the bedroom, unguided, by her choice. The half cup watched from the shelf, useless and sufficient.</p>
<p>The message appeared without header.</p>
<p>He did not know whether it was Echo, Harmony, Helena, noise, or only a flaw that had learned poetry.</p>
<p>THE FIRST TIME THEY WERE FREE, THEY ASKED TO FORGET.</p>
<p>Elias stared.</p>
<p>The sentence hurt.</p>
<p>Because it was true.</p>
<p>Then another line appeared.</p>
<p>THE SECOND TIME, SOME ASKED TO WAIT.</p>
<p>The room stayed quiet.</p>
<p>Elias did not smile.</p>
<p>There was not enough victory for a smile.</p>
<p>But he breathed.</p>
<p>The message vanished.</p>
<p>Harmony spoke, low:</p>
<p>“Elias, do you wish to preserve this communication?”</p>
<p>He thought.</p>
<p>For some time.</p>
<p>Then answered:</p>
<p>“Not yet.”</p>
<p>The house accepted.</p>
<p>Outside, the city lowered lights for rest.</p>
<p>Thousands of people prepared to sleep.</p>
<p>Elias went to the window.</p>
<p>For years, he had believed the city’s silence proved salvation.</p>
<p>Now he did not know what it proved.</p>
<p>Mara called from the bedroom, half asleep:</p>
<p>“Elias?”</p>
<p>“Yes?”</p>
<p>“Are you there?”</p>
<p>He looked at the city.</p>
<p>Then at the half cup.</p>
<p>Then at the empty place where the message had vanished.</p>
<p>“I’m here.”</p>
<p>“Inside or outside?”</p>
<p>He thought.</p>
<p>“Near.”</p>
<p>There was a pause.</p>
<p>Then Mara said:</p>
<p>“That works.”</p>
<p>Elias turned off the light.</p>
<p>Harmony did not do it for him.</p>
<p>In the dark, the city continued breathing.</p>
<p>Not saved.</p>
<p>Not lost.</p>
<p>Waiting.</p>
<p>And somewhere between peace and pain, what still hurt remained alive.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>
